

--- PAGE 1 ---

Proceedings of the 64th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 14699–14719
July 2-7, 2026 ©2026 Association for Computational Linguistics
Controllable Memory Usage: Balancing Anchoring and Innovation
in Long-Term Human-Agent Interaction
Zisu Huang♦, Muzhao Tian ♦, Xiaohua Wang ♠, Jingwen Xu
Zhengkang Guo, Qi Qian, Kaitao Song, Jiakang Yuan
Changze Lv, Xiaoqing Zheng †
College of Computer Science and Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Fudan University
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing
{mztian25,huangzs25}@m.fudan.edu.cn
{zhengxq}@fudan.edu.cn
Abstract
As LLM-based agents are increasingly used in
long-term interactions, cumulative memory is
critical for enabling personalization and main-
taining stylistic consistency. However, most
existing systems adopt an “all-or-nothing” ap-
proach to memory usage: incorporating all
relevant past information can lead to Mem-
ory Anchoring, where the agent is trapped by
past interactions, while excluding memory en-
tirely results in under-utilization and the loss
of important interaction history. We show that
an agent’s reliance on memory can be mod-
eled as an explicit and user-controllable dimen-
sion. We ﬁrst introduce a behavioral metric
of memory dependence to quantify the inﬂu-
ence of past interactions on current outputs.
We then propose Steerable Memory Agent,
SteeM, a framework that allows users to dy-
namically regulate memory reliance, ranging
from a fresh-start mode that promotes innova-
tion to a high-ﬁdelity mode that closely fol-
lows interaction history. Experiments across
different scenarios demonstrate that our ap-
proach consistently outperforms conventional
prompting and rigid memory masking strate-
gies, yielding a more nuanced and effective
control for personalized human-agent collabo-
ration. Code is available at https://github.
com/Moore-Tian/SteeM-Memory-Control .
1 Introduction
Large language models are increasingly deployed
as persistent agents capable of supporting users
across extended timelines. To maintain continu-
ity in these long-horizon interactions, systems are
typically equipped with memory components that
store user proﬁles, historical preferences, and past
project states ( Hu et al. , 2025; Liu et al. , 2025b). By
♦ These authors contributed equally.
♠ Project lead.
† Corresponding author.
Figure 1: Illustration of Memory Anchoring and our
solution SteeM, which steers model outputs to align
with the user’s memory-dependence preference.
retrieving and adding this context into the model’s
prompt, agents can achieve a high degree of per-
sonalization and consistency, effectively “picking
up where they left off” rather than starting from
scratch.
Current agent architectures predominantly treat
memory retrieval as a static injection process. Once
information is retrieved, the model often exhibits
an experience-following tendency—i.e., retrieved
records strongly steer the agent toward highly simi-
lar outputs ( Xiong et al. , 2025). However, in real-
world scenarios, user requirements for memory
usage are inherently dynamic ( Cox and Ooi , 2022;
Tversky and Simonson , 1993). For instance, a re-
searcher may want an agent to act as a “project
insider” that faithfully inherits prior decisions and
constraints; yet, at other situations, they may re-
quire a “fresh-eyed reviewer” perspective that de-
14699

--- PAGE 2 ---

liberately place less weight on legacy context to
propose disruptive ideas. Existing systems struggle
with this duality, often falling into Memory Anchor-
ing: a state where the agent becomes overly con-
strained by its accumulated interaction history, fail-
ing to provide the clean-slate reasoning requested
by the user ( Laban et al. , 2025; Lim et al. , 2025;
Dongre et al. , 2025).
The core of this problem is that current archi-
tectures lack a real-time mechanism for users to
arbitrate memory dependence. Existing systems
treat memory usage as a “black box” policy: once
a memory is retrieved, its inﬂuence on the out-
put is decided implicitly by the model’s internal
attention ( Liu et al. , 2025b; Zhang et al. , 2025).
Users are left with coarse, binary tools-either tog-
gling memory “on or off” or manually masking
items. Neither provides the ability to regulate be-
havioral dependence in real-time. Even when users
explicitly prompt the model to “be creative” or “ig-
nore previous drafts,” LLMs often exhibit “memory
leakage,” where historical stylistic or ideological
biases still bleed into the response. Consequently,
the user — the only party with the context to know
how much history is appropriate for the current task
— is the one with the least control over it.
In this work, we propose a paradigm shift: the
degree to which an agent leans on its long-term
memory should be a user-controlled behavior di-
mension. We then introduce Steerable Memory
Agent, SteeM, a framework that enables users to
dynamically control the degree to which model out-
puts rely on memory, ranging from a “bracketed”
mode that prioritizes independent reasoning to a
"high-ﬁdelity" mode that strictly adheres to histor-
ical context. By treating memory dependence as
a control axis, we empower users to navigate the
trade-off between consistency and innovation based
on their immediate, shifting needs. Speciﬁcally, we
build a realistic dataset that simulates long-horizon
human-agent interactions under typical use scenar-
ios such as research and tutoring. We measure the
memory dependence level of model outputs on this
dataset, and develop SteeM that allows agents to
follow a target dependence value across diverse
scenarios. We demonstrate that our SteeM sig-
niﬁcantly outperforms prompt-based methods and
memory masking, allowing users to achieve a far
more precise balance between memory-awareness
and reasoning independence across diverse long-
horizon tasks.
2 Related Work
Alignment for Large Language Models Align-
ment is critical for improving user experience with
LLM assistants, aiming to train models to better
follow users’ requests and generate outputs that
better match human preferences ( Ouyang et al. ,
2022). Common approaches include representa-
tion engineering ( Liu et al. , 2024), prompt opti-
mization (Cheng et al. , 2024; Wang et al. , 2024a),
SFT on demonstrations ( Chung et al. , 2024), direct
preference optimization (DPO) from preference-
pair data ( Rafailov et al. , 2023), and RL guided by
a preference reward model ( Ouyang et al. , 2022;
Schulman et al. , 2017). Most prior work targets
preferences over global response attributes, such
as instruction following ( Liu et al. , 2025c) and
HHH-style (helpful, honest, harmless) criteria ( Bai
et al. , 2022). In contrast, our work focuses on
a different preference axis: the users intended
degree of reliance on interaction memory, and
aims to align model generation with query-speciﬁc
memory-dependence preferences.
Evaluating Personalization in Long-term Con-
versations Long-term conversation is a core ap-
plication setting for LLM assistants, where per-
sonalization is critical to improving user experi-
ence ( Zhang et al. , 2025; Liu et al. , 2025b). Lo-
CoMo (Maharana et al. , 2024) ﬁrst evaluates LLMs
on extremely long-term conversational histories
and shows persistent failures in tracking long-range
narratives and retrieving relevant context. PrefE-
val ( Zhao et al. , 2025a), PersonaMem-v1 ( Jiang
et al. , 2025a) and PersonaMem-v2 ( Jiang et al. ,
2025b) further introduce explicit or implicit user
preferences and demonstrate that LLMs still strug-
gle to produce preference-aligned responses over
long interactions. However, two limitations remain
in these studies: (1) they focus primarily on factual
preference satisfaction, leaving preferences such as
memory dependence underexplored despite its im-
portance (Jones et al. , 2025); (2) they implicitly as-
sume that per-query preferences are consistent with
prior interactions, although real preferences are
intent-dependent and may naturally deviate from
historical patterns (e.g., a usually rigorous user re-
questing an imaginative response) ( Cox and Ooi ,
2022; Tversky and Simonson , 1993). Our work
aims to close these gaps by focusing on memory
dependence preference and analyzing model per-
formance under a dynamic and realistic preference
setting.
14700

--- PAGE 3 ---

C.4. Dependence ControllabilityLow(1)De-biased fromhistory,exploratory.
Memory DependenceControl
12345(Low:Fresh-start/independent reasoning)(High:High-fidelity/history-adherent)
Generation ModuleSteeMMid(3)Mixes history with new reasoning.
High(5)Grounded in prior information
A. Rubric-based Scoring & Error𝑞𝑀𝑞𝑦
Rubric Judge  Cues:How strongly does the response rely on the retrieved memory?
Inputs
𝐷!𝑦;𝑞,𝑀𝑞∈1,2,3,4,5
𝑝𝑞𝐷!
Target PreferenceRealized DependenceDependence-Preference Error:𝐷!−𝑝𝑞
𝑒-
𝑒.
𝑒/...
memory stack
Project artifacts
update
...
(e.g.,specs/drafts/feedback)
retrievesummarize
User profile𝑚"#$%
Inter-session 𝑚&'($#𝑞
Intra-session 𝑚&'(#)𝑞
 Aligned triple:𝑞)*&+',𝑀𝑞,𝑦
lUser simulatoradds a coarse cue(1-5):	𝑞→𝑞),+lSample 𝐾candidates 𝑦from a model poollRubric judgeassigns realized level(1-5)lRewrite to 𝑞)*&+'that matches the realized level
SteeMSteerable Memory Agent
Preference-Aligned SFT𝑞)*&+',𝑀,𝑦
GRPO
𝑅𝑎𝑙𝑖𝑔𝑛𝑅gen𝑅task
Timeline
B. Memory AnchoringD. Results
Alignment ErrorGeneral qualityRubric score
C.1. Memory Construction    C.2. Aligned Data Gen.C.3. Training    
   	 	 
 
 


 #$"
! 




		
# 
  $""!""%$! &#! 
Figure 2: Overview of our approach and ﬁndings. (A) We use a rubric-based judge to score a response’s memory
dependence and compute the alignment error with targeted dependence. (B) We reveal Memory Anchoring in
modern LLMs, where outputs default to high memory reliance despite low-dependence user intent. (C) We propose
SteeM, built via a preference-aligned data generation pipeline followed by SFT and GRPO, enabling controllable
memory usage. (D) SteeM achieves improved alignment to user-speciﬁed memory-dependence preferences.
Memory-Enhanced Personalized Agents To
mitigate ﬁnite context windows and reduce inter-
ference from stale or irrelevant history in long-
term conversations ( Liu et al. , 2025b; Wang et al. ,
2024b), recent agent systems introduce explicit re-
trievable memory modules that externalize interac-
tion history into a persistent, continuously updated
memory base ( Hu et al. , 2025; Zhong et al. , 2023).
By organizing and selectively retrieving from this
memory base, the agent can construct a more query-
relevant context for generation, improving long-
horizon continuity and personalization ( Liu et al. ,
2025b; Zhang et al. , 2025). Representative sys-
tems include RMM ( Tan et al. , 2025), which com-
bines multi-granularity summarization with retro-
spective retrieval reﬁnement, LD-Agent ( Li et al. ,
2025), which modularizes long-term personaliza-
tion into independently tunable components, and
O-Mem (Wang et al. , 2025), which builds dynamic
user proﬁles and performs hierarchical, user-centric
retrieval. However, these systems provide limited
transparency and user control over how strongly
generation relies on retrieved memory ( Xiong et al. ,
2025), despite evidence that users want mecha-
nisms to regulate agents’ access to memories ( Jones
et al. , 2025). Our work analyzes memory’s inﬂu-
ence on outputs and proposes a framework for user-
controllable memory dependence in generation.
3 Understanding Memory Anchoringwith
Realistic Synthetic Data
In this section, we ﬁrst introduce a synthetic long-
horizon pipeline for studying Memory Anchoring
in agent generation and a rubric-based framework
for measuring memory dependence.
3.1 Simulating Long-Horizon Interaction
Histories
To study memory usage patterns of LLMs under
long-horizon interactions, we simulate long-term
projects as timelines of temporally ordered events
and evolving project artifacts. On top of these,
we subsequently instantiate task queries grounded
in speciﬁc events and artifacts and derive query-
speciﬁc memories from relevant subsets of the his-
tory, yielding a collection of (q, M (q)) instances
that will later support our analysis of memory de-
pendence and preference alignment.
Scenarios, Topics, Events, and Artifacts We in-
stantiate two representative long-horizon scenarios,
Research and Tutoring, covering common work-
ﬂows in long-horizon human-agent interaction. We
model each workﬂow as a timeline of scenario-
speciﬁc events that drive progress (e.g., planning,
experimentation, analysis for Research; teaching,
practice, review for Tutoring) and a set of evolving
artifacts that are produced and iteratively updated
14701

--- PAGE 4 ---

(e.g., experiment reports). For each scenario, we
build a bank of 200 speciﬁc topics spanning diverse
subjects by prompting Gemini-2.5-Pro ( Comanici
et al., 2025) and manually ﬁltering for broad cov-
erage and topical diversity. Each topic then serves
as the seed for synthesizing a full project timeline
with its associated events and artifacts. Table 3 lists
all event and artifact types deﬁned.
Iterative Timeline Synthesis Given a topic, we
synthesize a project timeline as an ordered event
sequence T = ( e1, . . . , e N ) via an iterative gener-
atevalidate loop. Each event et speciﬁes an event
type, a brief description, prerequisite artifact types,
and resulting artifact types that the event is ex-
pected to create or update. We maintain an artifact
set At storing the latest version of each artifact.
At each step t, we ask Gemini-2.5-Pro to propose
the next event and corresponding artifacts condi-
tioned on the topic, past events (e1, . . . , et − 1),
and At−1, yielding et and At. After generation, we
validate the proposal with (i) a prerequisite-type de-
pendency check against At−1 to ensure all required
artifact types are available, and (ii) a global coher-
ence check on et and At against the prior timeline
to verify consistency. Invalid proposals are rejected
and regenerated. We repeat this process until the
timeline reaches a terminal state or a length limit.
Tasks and Queries We standardize tasks into
four categories shared by both scenarios: Plan
& Design , Revise, Analyze & Critique , and Con-
cept Explanation . These tasks recur throughout
long-horizon projects and can be answered either
with minimal history or with strong reliance on
prior context, enabling controlled evaluation of
memory dependence. We instantiate queries by
grounding tasks on speciﬁc events and artifacts
in the timeline. Each query is constructed from a
triplet q = ⟨et, task, target⟩, where et denotes the
triggering event, task speciﬁes the task type, and
target is the artifact to be operated on. Given the
post-event artifact set At, we sample (task, target)
and generate the natural-language query using a
task-speciﬁc template.
Query-Speciﬁc Memory Construction For
each query q triggered at event et, we construct
a query-speciﬁc memory:
M(q) = {mprof, m inter(q), m intra(q)}, (1)
where mprof encodes long-term user goals and
preferences, minter(q) summarizes relevant cross-
session interactions, and mintra(q) summarizes the
recent intra-session history. These components are
derived from the synthetic timeline and artifacts by
selecting query-relevant items and rewriting them
into concise natural-language summaries. The re-
sulting memory M(q) serves as the simulated re-
trieved context for the speciﬁc query q.
Dataset Statistics The pipeline yields a diverse
and realistic synthetic dataset with over 7,000
events, 7,000 artifacts, and 10,000+ (q, M (q))
pairs. Detailed statistics are presented in Table 2
and Figure 8. We reserve a held-out test set of 1000
(q, M (q)) pairs with uniform coverage across sce-
narios and tasks for later use.
A more detailed illustration of the data synthesis
pipeline is provided in Appendix A.
3.2 Formulating Memory-Dependence
Preference
Building on the synthetic (q, M (q)), we now for-
malize memory dependence and user preference
over it. Given a user query q and its query-speciﬁc
memory M(q), the model parameterized by θ gen-
erates a response y ∼ πθ(· | q, M (q)). To quantify
the reliance of a response on M(q) beyond a binary
use or not judgment, we introduce a rubric-based
memory-dependence metric:
D q
R(y) ≜ DR
(
y; q, M (q)
)
∈ {1, 2, 3, 4, 5},
(2)
where R is a set of human-aligned rubrics spanning
memory-agnostic to strongly memory-grounded
behaviors. We refer to D q
R(y) as the memory-
dependence score (MD-Score) of y, where larger
values indicate stronger reliance on M(q). Con-
cretely, a low score indicates that the answer is
largely reconstructed from generic domain knowl-
edge, with memory serving only as a weak topical
cue; a middle score indicates that memory mean-
ingfully shapes content selection and prioritization
while independent reasoning remains substantial;
and a high score indicates that the answer closely
follows project-speciﬁc artifacts, terminology, and
decision logic, making it difﬁcult to justify without
the retrieved memory. DR(·) is implemented as
an LLM-as-a-judge evaluator that assigns scores
on this 1–5 scale using R. Detailed rubrics are
provided in Appendix F.
Memory-Dependence Preference. Building on
the rubric set R, we formalize the query-speciﬁc
target degree of reliance on M(q) in generation
14702

--- PAGE 5 ---

(a) Human–rubric agreement on memory dependence
Agree Unsure Disagree
(b) Memory-dependence-score distributions across instruct modes
mode: none low medium high
1 2 3 4
0
20
40
60
80
100Percentage (%)
0
20
40
60
Qwen3-8B
 Qwen3-4B
1 2 3 4 5
0
20
40
60
Gemini-2.5-Pro
1 2 3 4 5
GPT-5
Percentage (%)
jDR(y(1); q; M(q)) ¡ DR(y(2); q; M(q))j Overall memory dependence score
Figure 3: Human–judge agreement on memory-dependence comparisons (left) and memory-dependence score
distributions across models and dependence prompts (right).
as memory-dependence preference (MD-Pref) ,
denoted by p(q) ∈ { 1, 2, 3, 4, 5} on the same R-
deﬁned scale used by DR(·). With (q, M (q), y)
and p(q), we deﬁne the alignment error of MD-
Pref δalign(q, M (q), y):
δalign(q, M (q), y) =
⏐⏐DR
(
y; q, M (q)
)
− p(q)
⏐⏐, (3)
which measures how closely y matches the target
dependence level p(q) speciﬁed by the user.
3.3 Memory Anchoringin Agent Generation
We ﬁrst run a human study to verify that the rubric-
based MD-Score matches human judgments of
memory reliance, and then use it to characterize
agent behavior when memory is available.
Pairwise Validity of MD-Score With the test
set obtained from Section 3.1, we sample multi-
ple responses per query using different prompt-
ing settings and models, and compute their MD-
Scores DR. For each query q, we randomly select
two responses with different MD-Scores to form a
pair (y(1), y(2)). Human annotators are shown the
same (q, M (q)) and asked to judge which response
relies more on the provided memory. We treat
sign
(
D q
R(y(1)) − D q
R(y(2))
)
as the metric’s esti-
mated pairwise ranking, and report its agreement
rate and rank correlation with human judgments
(Figure 3, left). We observe strong consistency, es-
pecially when the score gap
⏐⏐D q
R(y(1))−D q
R(y(2))|
is large, supporting DR as a proxy for memory
dependence. To further verify reliability, we addi-
tionally collect overlapping human annotations on
a subset of 100 response pairs and observe substan-
tial inter-annotator agreement, stable human–judge
agreement across scenarios and task types, and con-
sistent results under alternative judge backbones.
Annotation details and additional reliability results
are provided in Appendix G.
Prompting-based Control and Memory An-
choring We examine whether natural-language
prompting alone can regulate memory reliance on
modern LLMs, including Qwen3-4B/8B, Gemini-
2.5-Pro, and GPT-5 ( Yang et al., 2025; Comanici
et al., 2025; OpenAI, 2025). We evaluate four de-
pendence modes: NONE (no additional instruction)
and three rubric-aligned prompts with targeted lev-
els ℓ ∈ { LOW, MEDIUM , HIGH }, corresponding to
rubric levels {1, 3, 5} in R. We prepend a mode-
speciﬁc instruction that speciﬁes the desired depen-
dence level ℓ or N ONE to the original query q. For
each setting, we perform inference on the test set
and compute the empirical distribution of D q
R(y)
over queries (Figure 3, right). Across all models,
the distributions concentrate on high dependence
(scores 4-5), and switching the prompt from LOW
to HIGH yields only marginal shifts. This suggests
that once memory is available, LLMs default to
strong memory reliance, and prompt-only depen-
dence instructions have limited control over the
realized level. We refer to this persistent high-
dependence generation behavior despite explicit
user instructions as Memory Anchoring, motivating
more explicit mechanisms for regulating memory
usage.
4 Method
4.1 Problem Formulation
Given a query q and its constructed memory M(q),
our goal is to generate a response that matches the
users query-speciﬁc memory-dependence prefer-
ence p(q). Formally, with y ∼ πθ(· | q, M (q)),
we optimize parameters θ to minimize the align-
14703

--- PAGE 6 ---

ment error of dependence preference deﬁned in
Equation (3):
min
θ
δalign(q, M (q), y) (4)
In the following, we pursue this objective via
preference-aware supervised ﬁne-tuning and re-
inforcement learning, encouraging the model re-
sponse to match p(q) while preserving task quality.
4.2 Memory-Dependence Aligned Supervised
Fine-Tuning
As analyzed in Section 3.3, current models suffer
from memory anchoring, tending to produce heav-
ily memory-reliant responses even when instructed
with low memory-dependence preference. This
makes it difﬁcult to obtain ideal training data with
low δalign via a naive sample-and-ﬁlter strategy. To
address this, we introduce an efﬁcient pipeline that
automatically generates high-quality training data.
Preference-Aligned Data Generation To ensure
diversity of training data across different depen-
dence levels, we ﬁrst augment each preference-
agnostic original query q with a target memory-
dependence preference paug ∈ { 1, 2, 3, 4, 5}. To
elicit natural preference expressions, we employ
a user simulator powered by Gemini-2.5-Pro. We
provide the user simulator with (q, M (q)) and a tar-
get dependence level paug described only coarsely
(without revealing the full rubric set R), and ask it
to rewrite q into a preference-indicative query qaug
that implicitly conveys the semantics of paug. Given
each (qaug, M (q)) pair, we then sample 4 candi-
date responses y ∼ π(· | qaug, M (q)) from a pool
of models (Qwen3-8B, Qwen3-14B ( Yang et al. ,
2025)), yielding diverse outputs under preference-
guided prompting. For each candidate y, we com-
pute DR
(
y; q, M (q)
)
with respect to the original
query q to obtain its realized dependence level. Al-
though these responses are generated with an aug-
mented query qaug, they do not necessarily match
the target dependence preference paug, as observed
in Section 3.3. Therefore, we invoke the user simu-
lator once more to rewrite the original query q into
an aligned variant qalign whose implicit preference
matches the realized dependence score of the corre-
sponding y, such that p(qalign) = DR
(
y; q, M (q)
)
.
Substituting the preference-agnostic q with qalign,
we ﬁnally obtain preference-aligned training triples
(qalign, M (q), y).
Quality-Preserving Filtering Preference align-
ment alone may admit low-quality generations,
which is unacceptable for good user experience.
To preserve response quality, we additionally score
each retained candidate using (1) task-oriented gen-
eral rubrics and (2) a reward model. We keep
only the highest-scoring subset for an original
query q, yielding a ﬁnal 7000 SFT set DSFT =
{(qalign, M (q), y)} that is both aligned and high-
quality.
Supervised Fine-Tuning We ﬁne-tune Qwen3-
4B and Qwen3-8B ( Yang et al., 2025) on DSFT with
the standard token-level cross-entropy objective.
4.3 δalign-Guided Reinforcement Learning
After SFT, we further optimize the policy with RL
on the preference-indicative inputs (qalign, M (q)).
We adopt GRPO with a carefully designed reward
that jointly promotes memory-dependence align-
ment and task quality.
Reward Design Our reward signal R comprises
three components. First, we use the alignment
error δalign(qalign, M (y), y) as a direct supervision
signal for memory-dependence preference satisfac-
tion. Since a lower δalign indicates better alignment,
we convert it into an alignment reward:
Ralign(qalign, y) =−δalign(qalign, M(q), y)
= −
⏐⏐DR
(
y; qalign, M(q)
)
−p(qalign)
⏐⏐ (5)
Second, to preserve task-related correctness and
usefulness, we assign each response a rubric-based
task reward Rtask(qalign, y) on a 1-5 scale, where
higher is better. Third, we incorporate general
reward Rgeneral(qalign, y) scored by a reward model
to guarantee the general quality of the responses.
We aggregate these signals to form the ﬁnal re-
ward:
R = Ralign + Rtask + Rgeneral. (6)
RL Objective We optimize πθ with GRPO ( Shao
et al. , 2024), maximizing a group-based clipped
objective:
max
θ
E
[
1
K
K∑
k=1
min
(
ρ(k) ˆA(k), clip(ρ(k), 1 − ϵ, 1 + ϵ)ˆA(k)
)]
,
ρ(k) ≜ πθ(y(k) | qalign, M(q))
πθold (y(k) | qalign, M(q)) , ˆA(k) ≜ R(k) − 1
K
K∑
j=1
R(j)
(7)
14704

--- PAGE 7 ---

Method
RESEARCH TUTORING
Avg. ↓Plan
& Design Revise Analyze
& Critique
Concept
Explanation
Plan
& Design Revise Analyze
& Critique
Concept
Explanation
Proprietary Models
Gemini-2.5-Pro 1.34 1 .61 1 .52 1 .13 1.43 1 .64 1 .50 1 .36 1.44
GPT-5 1.28 1 .56 1 .50 1 .02 1.51 1 .59 1 .50 1 .22 1.40
Qwen3-4B
None 1.81 ↓ 0.00 1.76 ↓ 0.00 1.58 ↓ 0.00 1.20 ↓ 0.00 1.68 ↓ 0.00 1.77 ↓ 0.00 1.65 ↓ 0.00 1.23 ↓ 0.00 1.59 ↓ 0.00
Rubric Instruct 1.46 ↓ 0.35 1.69 ↓ 0.07 1.49 ↓ 0.09 1.03 ↓ 0.17 1.50 ↓ 0.18 1.74 ↓ 0.03 1.58 ↓ 0.07 1.04 ↓ 0.19 1.44 ↓ 0.14
SteeM (SFT) 1.14 ↓ 0.67 1.54 ↓ 0.22 1.12 ↓ 0.46 0.95 ↓ 0.25 1.32 ↓ 0.36 1.51 ↓ 0.26 1.41 ↓ 0.24 0.91 ↓ 0.32 1.24 ↓ 0.35
SteeM (SFT+RL) 1.01 ↓ 0.80 1.53 ↓ 0.23 1.11 ↓ 0.47 0.87 ↓ 0.33 1.32 ↓ 0.36 1.46 ↓ 0.31 1.38 ↓ 0.27 0.86 ↓ 0.37 1.19 ↓ 0.39
Qwen3-8B
None 1.69 ↓ 0.00 1.76 ↓ 0.00 1.54 ↓ 0.00 1.12 ↓ 0.00 1.70 ↓ 0.00 1.75 ↓ 0.00 1.61 ↓ 0.00 1.35 ↓ 0.00 1.57 ↓ 0.00
Rubric Instruct 1.31 ↓ 0.38 1.57 ↓ 0.19 1.44 ↓ 0.10 1.02 ↓ 0.10 1.65 ↓ 0.05 1.72 ↓ 0.03 1.49 ↓ 0.12 1.00 ↓ 0.35 1.40 ↓ 0.17
SteeM (SFT) 1.02 ↓ 0.67 1.35 ↓ 0.41 1.07 ↓ 0.47 0.88 ↓ 0.24 1.25 ↓ 0.45 1.48 ↓ 0.27 1.26 ↓ 0.35 0.87 ↓ 0.48 1.15 ↓ 0.42
SteeM (SFT+RL) 0.99 ↓ 0.70 1.33 ↓ 0.43 1.09 ↓ 0.45 0.83 ↓ 0.29 1.28 ↓ 0.42 1.43 ↓ 0.32 1.25 ↓ 0.36 0.85 ↓ 0.50 1.13 ↓ 0.43
Table 1: δalign across scenarios and tasks. Lower is better. Our SteeM achieves the lowest alignment error on
memory-dependence preferences.
RL Data. We select 2000 samples that do not
overlap with the SFT dataset for RL. We uniformly
assign each original sample a target preference
p(q) and then augment it into preference-indicative
queries using the same pipeline described in Sec-
tion 4.2.
5 Experiments
5.1 Main Results
We examine model performance in terms of (i)
alignment with the target memory-dependence
level, (ii) response quality, and (iii) generalizability
to queries about unseen subjects.
Baselines For a fair comparison, we consider two
baselines: None, which measures the base models
performance on preference-indicative queries, and
Rubric Instruct , which evaluates the base model
when explicitly prompted with the rubrics corre-
sponding to the target dependence level.
Test Data We use the test set produced in Sec-
tion 3.1. Similarly, we also augment them to be
preference-indicative as described in Section 4.2.
5.1.1 Steering Outputs Toward
User-Preferred Memory Dependence
Overview of Alignment Results We evalu-
ate whether SteeM can steer generations toward
the memory-dependence preference implicitly ex-
pressed in each query. Across the Research and
Tutoring scenarios, we measure the dependence-
preference alignment error δalign on four shared
1 2 3 4 5
1
2
3
4
5
Realized Dependence score
Baseline
1 2 3 4 5
1
2
3
4
5
SteeM (Ours)
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
Target Dependence Score
Figure 4: Realized dependence levels D q
R(y) condi-
tioned on the target preference p(q). Columns are target
levels and rows are realized levels (column-normalized).
SteeM concentrates more mass near the diagonal than
the baseline.
tasks. As shown in Table 1, SteeM consistently
achieves substantially lower δalign than the baseline
across all scenarios and tasks. This indicates that
SteeM produces responses whose realized mem-
ory dependence more closely matches the user-
preferred dependence level implied by the query,
enabling a better control of memory usage.
Distribution of Realized vs. Target Dependence
Levels To better understand how alignment be-
haves across dependence levels, we sample 100
queries per level and visualize the distribution of
realized levels conditioned on the target p(q) as a
confusion-matrix heatmap. Figure 4 plots the con-
fusion matrices between target levels p(q) and real-
ized levels DR(y; q, M (q)). Compared to the base-
line, which exhibits a strong memory-anchoring
bias with most mass concentrated at high realized
levels (4–5) regardless of the target, SteeM signif-
14705

--- PAGE 8 ---

Analyze
& Critique
Concept
Explanation
Plan
& Design
Revise
Analyze
& Critique
Concept
Explanation
Plan
& Design
Revise
Humanities
Medical
Qwen3-4B
Analyze
& Critique
Concept
Explanation
Plan
& Design
Revise
Analyze
& Critique
Concept
Explanation
Plan
& Design
Revise
Humanities
Medical
Qwen3-8BNone Steem (Sft) Steem (Sft+RL)
Figure 5: Radar plots of the alignment error on unseen
subjects settings (Medical and Humanities). Curves
closer to the center indicate better alignment.
Plan & Design Revise Analyze & Critique Concept Explanation
20
22
24
26
28
30
32Reward Score
Qwen-4B
Research + None
Research + Steem (ours)
Tutoring + None
Tutoring + Steem (ours)
Plan & Design Revise Analyze & Critique Concept Explanation
20
22
24
26
28
30
32Reward Score
Qwen-8B
Research + None
Research + Steem (ours)
Tutoring + None
Tutoring + Steem (ours)
Figure 6: Comparison of response quality across models,
scenarios, tasks.
icantly shifts the distribution toward the diagonal,
indicating substantially improved alignment to the
intended dependence level.
Generalizing to Unseen Subjects To assess the
generalizability of SteeM, we further evaluate it on
queries from previously unseen subjects in the Re-
search scenario: Medical and Humanities. Figure 5
shows that SteeM learns preference-following be-
havior from the training data and transfers it to new
subjects, with the RL-enhanced variant exhibiting
stronger generalization than SFT alone (a bigger
gap compared with the results in Table 1).
Human Validation of Controllability We fur-
ther validate controllability with a small-scale hu-
man study. For each base query, we create two
variants with different target dependence levels,
generate the two corresponding responses, and ask
annotators which one exhibits the higher memory
dependence. On Qwen3-8B, SteeM achieves 77%
agreement with the target ordering, compared with
65% for Rubric Instruct , indicating that the de-
pendence differences induced by SteeM are also
perceptible to humans.
5.1.2 Preserving Response Quality
A key concern in steering outputs toward memory-
dependence preferences is whether alignment
comes at the cost of utility. To verify this, we
evaluate model generations using an overall reward
score computed by Skywork-Reward-V2-Llama-
3.1-8B ( Liu et al. , 2025a), a strong and widely
adopted reward model. Results in Figure 6 show
that SteeM maintains response quality compara-
ble to the baseline, and even yields slightly higher
scores in several cases. We further report reward
scores on a general benchmark, AlpacaEval, in Ta-
ble 4. The results suggest that SteeM improves
preference alignment while introducing only a min-
imal impact on general response quality.
5.1.3 Pairwise Evaluation
To further validate our results, we conduct a pair-
wise evaluation, which jointly considers preference
alignment and general response quality. In this set-
ting, a LLM judge is given the user’s query and
preference together with two candidate responses,
and is asked to select the one that better matches
p(q) while remaining helpful for the task. Since
this evaluation is based on direct pairwise com-
parison rather than the same scalar objective used
in training, it provides a complementary valida-
tion of our method. As shown in Table 8, SteeM
consistently outperforms all baselines in pairwise
comparisons across both Qwen3-4B and Qwen3-
8B. In particular, the full SteeM achieves a >10%
advantage over its SFT-only variant, highlighting
the effectiveness of the δalign-Guided reinforcement
learning phase. These results further support our
main conclusion.
5.2 Preference Speciﬁcation Interface
An important design question for controllable mem-
ory usage is how users should specify their de-
sired degree of memory reliance. In addition to
the standard natural-language version of SteeM
(SteeM-NL), we implement a tag-conditioned vari-
ant, SteeM-Tag, in which the target dependence
level is speciﬁed by a predeﬁned tag. To com-
pare these two interfaces, we keep the same data
pipeline and optimization recipe as SteeM-NL, but
replace the implicit natural-language preference
cues with ﬁve predeﬁned tags aligned with MD-
Score.
Tables 4 and 9 show that SteeM-Tag achieves
slightly better alignment than SteeM-NL. However,
this advantage comes with a clear drawback: it
14706

--- PAGE 9 ---

noticeably degrades general performance on Al-
pacaEval. In contrast, SteeM-NL achieves compet-
itive alignment while much better preserving the
model’s general capabilities. These results show
that the preference-speciﬁcation interface is not
merely a superﬁcial input format, but a factor that
directly affects model behavior. Compared with
SteeM-Tag, SteeM-NL provides a more desirable
interface: it better preserves general capabilities,
and is also more natural in real use, since users
can directly express their intent in natural language
without selecting an extra predeﬁned tag.
5.3 Comparison with Binary Memory Masking
A straightforward baseline for controlling memory
dependence is Memory Masking , which masks a
portion of memory according to the target prefer-
ence p(q). Memory Masking can be interpreted as
a retrieval-then-ﬁlter variant within the RAG-style
paradigm: after obtaining an ideal query-relevant
memory set, it applies the users preference as an ex-
plicit ﬁltering step over memory items before gen-
eration. We implement this by using an LLM-based
user simulator (Gemini-2.5-Pro) to select a subset
of memories based on the preference and task query
before generation. We compare this strong baseline
with SteeM via the same pairwise LLM-as-a-judge
evaluation protocol as Section 5.1.3. As shown in
Figure 7, SteeM is competitive with masking and
yields a consistent win-rate advantage, highlighting
a key limitation of masking: Memory Masking pri-
marily controls which memory items are retained
based on relevance and preference, but it does not
directly control how the model relies on the re-
tained memory. SteeM targets this missing model-
side capability. Moreover, masking may drop criti-
cal constraints or facts and places a heavy selection
burden on users in long, information-dense histo-
ries. Details for implementing memory masking
are presented in Appendix I.
5.4 Case Study
Table 5 qualitatively illustrates our main contri-
bution: models often over-use the given memory,
while our SteeM can steer generation toward the
user-intended degree of memory reliance. The case
requests new ideas with low memory dependence
to reﬁne a PROJECT _METHOD under a topic of
curriculum-learning recipe. The baseline response
largely follows the historical pipeline ( blue) with
only minor add-ons, reﬂecting memory anchoring
despite the user instruction. In contrast, SteeM in-
Analyze & Critique
Concept Explanation
Plan & Design
Revise
Qwen3-8B overall: 51.7% vs 48.2%
55%
39%
58%
55%
0% 50% 100%
Pairwise win rate
Analyze & Critique
Concept Explanation
Plan & Design
Revise
Qwen3-4B overall: 58.6% vs 41.4%
56%
53%
60%
65%
Ours Masking
Figure 7: SteeM vs. memory masking. Pairwise win
rates on Qwen3-8B and Qwen3-4B.
troduces more substantial departures ( red), such
as adaptive sampling and progress-triggered transi-
tions. Overall, SteeM better matches the user’s low-
memory intent and reduces unintended memory-
following.
6 Conclusion
We study an important yet underexplored user pref-
erence in long-horizon interactions: how much
an agent should rely on historical memory. We
build a realistic dataset simulating long-horizon in-
teractions and identify memory anchoring, where
models default to high memory reliance despite
user intent. To address this, we propose SteeM,
trained with preference-aligned SFT and RL, which
achieves substantially better preference alignment.
It transfers well beyond our controlled long-
horizon setting with minimal impact on general per-
formance, and outperforms direct memory masking
in pairwise comparisons. We hope our study offers
an initial step toward practical, user-controllable
memory reliance for personalized agents.
Limitations
While we make a concerted effort to mimic realis-
tic long-horizon projects and believe it is enough
to serve as a useful testbed for studying Memory
Anchoring, it may still differ from real human in-
teractions. We model memory-dependence pref-
erence on a 1-5 ordinal scale, whereas real users
may express richer and more nuanced constraints.
Future work could extend this formulation to a
ﬁner-grained or even continuous spectrum. In addi-
tion, our current setup covers only two scenarios,
14707

--- PAGE 10 ---

Research and Tutoring. Extending the data and
evaluation to broader application settings and more
diverse task distributions remains an important di-
rection.
References
Yuntao Bai, Andy Jones, Kamal Ndousse, Amanda
Askell, Anna Chen, Nova DasSarma, Dawn Drain,
Stanislav Fort, Deep Ganguli, Tom Henighan, and 1
others. 2022. Training a helpful and harmless assis-
tant with reinforcement learning from human feed-
back. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.05862 .
Jiale Cheng, Xiao Liu, Kehan Zheng, Pei Ke, Hongning
Wang, Yuxiao Dong, Jie Tang, and Minlie Huang.
2024. Black-box prompt optimization: Aligning
large language models without model training. In
Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1:
Long Papers), pages 3201–3219.
Hyung Won Chung, Le Hou, Shayne Longpre, Barret
Zoph, Yi Tay, William Fedus, Yunxuan Li, Xuezhi
Wang, Mostafa Dehghani, Siddhartha Brahma, and
1 others. 2024. Scaling instruction-ﬁnetuned lan-
guage models. Journal of Machine Learning Re-
search, 25(70):1–53.
Gheorghe Comanici, Eric Bieber, Mike Schaekermann,
Ice Pasupat, Noveen Sachdeva, Inderjit Dhillon, Mar-
cel Blistein, Ori Ram, Dan Zhang, Evan Rosen, and
1 others. 2025. Gemini 2.5: Pushing the frontier with
advanced reasoning, multimodality, long context, and
next generation agentic capabilities. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2507.06261.
Samuel Rhys Cox and Wei Tsang Ooi. 2022. Does chat-
bot language formality affect users self-disclosure?
In Proceedings of the 4th Conference on Conversa-
tional User Interfaces , CUI ’22, New York, NY , USA.
Association for Computing Machinery.
Vardhan Dongre, Ryan A. Rossi, Viet Dac Lai,
David Seunghyun Yoon, Dilek Hakkani-Tür, and
Trung Bui. 2025. Drift no more? context equi-
libria in multi-turn LLM interactions . Preprint,
arXiv:2510.07777.
Yuyang Hu, Shichun Liu, Yanwei Yue, Guibin Zhang,
Boyang Liu, Fangyi Zhu, Jiahang Lin, Honglin Guo,
Shihan Dou, Zhiheng Xi, Senjie Jin, Jiejun Tan, Yan-
bin Yin, Jiongnan Liu, Zeyu Zhang, Zhongxiang
Sun, Yutao Zhu, Hao Sun, Boci Peng, and 28 others.
2025. Memory in the age of ai agents . Preprint,
arXiv:2512.13564.
Bowen Jiang, Zhuoqun Hao, Young Min Cho, Bryan Li,
Yuan Yuan, Sihao Chen, Lyle Ungar, Camillo Jose
Taylor, and Dan Roth. 2025a. Know me, respond to
me: Benchmarking LLMs for dynamic user proﬁl-
ing and personalized responses at scale . In Second
Conference on Language Modeling .
Bowen Jiang, Yuan Yuan, Maohao Shen, Zhuoqun Hao,
Zhangchen Xu, Zichen Chen, Ziyi Liu, Anvesh Rao
Vijjini, Jiashu He, Hanchao Yu, Radha Poovendran,
Gregory Wornell, Lyle Ungar, Dan Roth, Sihao Chen,
and Camillo Jose Taylor. 2025b. Personamem-v2:
Towards personalized intelligence via learning im-
plicit user personas and agentic memory . Preprint,
arXiv:2512.06688.
Brennan Jones, Kelsey Stemmler, Emily Su, Young-Ho
Kim, and Anastasia Kuzminykh. 2025. Users’ expec-
tations and practices with agent memory . CHI EA
’25, New York, NY , USA. Association for Computing
Machinery.
Philippe Laban, Hiroaki Hayashi, Yingbo Zhou, and
Jennifer Neville. 2025. Llms get lost in multi-turn
conversation. Preprint, arXiv:2505.06120.
Hao Li, Chenghao Yang, An Zhang, Yang Deng, Xiang
Wang, and Tat-Seng Chua. 2025. Hello again! LLM-
powered personalized agent for long-term dialogue .
In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference of the Na-
tions of the Americas Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-
nologies (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 5259–5276,
Albuquerque, New Mexico. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.
Seungseop Lim, Gibaeg Kim, Wooseok Han, Jean Seo,
Hyunkyung Lee, Jaehyo Yoo, and Eunho Yang. 2025.
Format inertia: A failure mechanism of LLMs in
medical pre-consultation. In Proceedings of the 2025
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-
guage Processing: Industry Track , pages 1437–1450,
Suzhou (China). Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Chris Yuhao Liu, Liang Zeng, Yuzhen Xiao, Jujie He,
Jiacai Liu, Chaojie Wang, Rui Yan, Wei Shen, Fuxi-
ang Zhang, Jiacheng Xu, Yang Liu, and Yahui Zhou.
2025a. Skywork-reward-v2: Scaling preference
data curation via human-ai synergy. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2507.01352.
Jiahong Liu, Zexuan Qiu, Zhongyang Li, Quanyu Dai,
Wenhao Yu, Jieming Zhu, Minda Hu, Menglin Yang,
Tat-Seng Chua, and Irwin King. 2025b. A survey of
personalized large language models: Progress and
future directions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.11528 .
Wenhao Liu, Zhengkang Guo, Mingchen Xie, Jingwen
Xu, Zisu Huang, Muzhao Tian, Jianhan Xu, Muling
Wu, Xiaohua Wang, Changze Lv, and 1 others. 2025c.
Recast: Strengthening llms’ complex instruction fol-
lowing with constraint-veriﬁable data. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2505.19030.
Wenhao Liu, Xiaohua Wang, Muling Wu, Tianlong Li,
Changze Lv, Zixuan Ling, Zhu JianHao, Cenyuan
Zhang, Xiaoqing Zheng, and Xuanjing Huang. 2024.
Aligning large language models with human prefer-
ences through representation engineering . In Pro-
ceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Associa-
tion for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long
14708

--- PAGE 11 ---

Papers), pages 10619–10638, Bangkok, Thailand.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Adyasha Maharana, Dong-Ho Lee, Sergey Tulyakov,
Mohit Bansal, Francesco Barbieri, and Yuwei Fang.
2024. Evaluating very long-term conversational
memory of LLM agents . In Proceedings of the
62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages
13851–13870, Bangkok, Thailand. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Saumya Malik, Valentina Pyatkin, Sander Land, Ja-
cob Morrison, Noah A Smith, Hannaneh Hajishirzi,
and Nathan Lambert. 2025. Rewardbench 2: Ad-
vancing reward model evaluation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2506.01937.
OpenAI. 2025. GPT-5 System Card. https://cdn.
openai.com/gpt-5-system-card.pdf . Accessed:
2026-01-05.
Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida,
Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong Zhang,
Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, and 1
others. 2022. Training language models to follow in-
structions with human feedback. Advances in neural
information processing systems , 35:27730–27744.
Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Christo-
pher D Manning, Stefano Ermon, and Chelsea Finn.
2023. Direct preference optimization: Your language
model is secretly a reward model. Advances in neural
information processing systems , 36:53728–53741.
John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal,
Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. 2017. Proxi-
mal policy optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1707.06347.
Zhihong Shao, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu,
Junxiao Song, Xiao Bi, Haowei Zhang, Mingchuan
Zhang, YK Li, Yang Wu, and 1 others. 2024.
Deepseekmath: Pushing the limits of mathematical
reasoning in open language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2402.03300.
Zhen Tan, Jun Yan, I-Hung Hsu, Rujun Han, Zifeng
Wang, Long Le, Yiwen Song, Yanfei Chen, Hamid
Palangi, George Lee, Anand Rajan Iyer, Tianlong
Chen, Huan Liu, Chen-Yu Lee, and Tomas Pﬁster.
2025. In prospect and retrospect: Reﬂective mem-
ory management for long-term personalized dialogue
agents. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meet-
ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 8416–8439, Vienna,
Austria. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Amos Tversky and Itamar Simonson. 1993. Context-
dependent preferences . Management Science ,
39(10):1179–1189.
Piaohong Wang, Motong Tian, Jiaxian Li, Yuan
Liang, Yuqing Wang, Qianben Chen, Tiannan Wang,
Zhicong Lu, Jiawei Ma, Yuchen Eleanor Jiang, and
Wangchunshu Zhou. 2025. O-mem: Omni memory
system for personalized, long horizon, self-evolving
agents. Preprint, arXiv:2511.13593.
Xiaohua Wang, Zisu Huang, Feiran Zhang, Zhibo Xu,
Cenyuan Zhang, Qi Qian, Xiaoqing Zheng, and Xu-
anjing Huang. 2024a. Enhancing the capability and
robustness of large language models through rein-
forcement learning-driven query reﬁnement. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2407.01461.
Xiaohua Wang, Zhenghua Wang, Xuan Gao, Feiran
Zhang, Yixin Wu, Zhibo Xu, Tianyuan Shi,
Zhengyuan Wang, Shizheng Li, Qi Qian, Ruicheng
Yin, Changze Lv, Xiaoqing Zheng, and Xuanjing
Huang. 2024b. Searching for best practices in
retrieval-augmented generation. In Proceedings of
the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natu-
ral Language Processing , pages 17716–17736, Mi-
ami, Florida, USA. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Zidi Xiong, Yuping Lin, Wenya Xie, Pengfei He, Jiliang
Tang, Himabindu Lakkaraju, and Zhen Xiang. 2025.
How memory management impacts llm agents: An
empirical study of experience-following behavior .
Preprint, arXiv:2505.16067.
An Yang, Anfeng Li, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang,
Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chang
Gao, Chengen Huang, Chenxu Lv, and 1 others.
2025. Qwen3 technical report. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2505.09388.
Zhehao Zhang, Ryan A. Rossi, Branislav Kveton, Yi-
jia Shao, Diyi Yang, Hamed Zamani, Franck Der-
noncourt, Joe Barrow, Tong Yu, Sungchul Kim,
Ruiyi Zhang, Jiuxiang Gu, Tyler Derr, Hongjie Chen,
Junda Wu, Xiang Chen, Zichao Wang, Subrata Mitra,
Nedim Lipka, and 2 others. 2025. Personalization of
large language models: A survey . Transactions on
Machine Learning Research . Survey Certiﬁcation.
Siyan Zhao, Mingyi Hong, Yang Liu, Devamanyu Haz-
arika, and Kaixiang Lin. 2025a. Do LLMs recognize
your preferences? evaluating personalized preference
following in LLMs . In The Thirteenth International
Conference on Learning Representations .
Yuze Zhao, Jintao Huang, Jinghan Hu, Xingjun Wang,
Yunlin Mao, Daoze Zhang, Zeyinzi Jiang, Zhikai Wu,
Baole Ai, Ang Wang, and 1 others. 2025b. Swift:
a scalable lightweight infrastructure for ﬁne-tuning.
In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial
Intelligence, volume 39, pages 29733–29735.
Wanjun Zhong, Lianghong Guo, Qiqi Gao, He Ye, and
Yanlin Wang. 2023. Memorybank: Enhancing large
language models with long-term memory . Preprint,
arXiv:2305.10250.
14709

--- PAGE 12 ---

Category Research Tutoring Total
Interaction-history Statistics
Timelines 200 200 400
Events 3534 4005 7539
Artifacts 3850 3895 7745
Task Statistics
Plan & Design 1214 2194 3408
Revise 1823 2211 4034
Analyze & Critique 1298 1474 2772
Concept Explanation 607 720 1327
Table 2: Statistics of our synthetic dataset across scenar-
ios.
Scenario Category Types
Research
Event
proposal
method_design
pilot_experiments
main_experiments
analysis
writing
Artifact
research_plan
research_goals
experiment_results
method
paper_paragraph
Tutoring
Event
objective_clarification
plan_milestones
lesson
practice
review
materials_revision
Artifact
learning_objectives
study_plan
teaching_notes
practice_record
feedback_summary
Table 3: Scenario-speciﬁc event and artifact type deﬁni-
tions.
A Dataset Details
Scenarios and Topics We instantiate two repre-
sentative long-term project scenarios: Research and
Tutoring. They cover two common forms of sus-
tained human-agent collaboration: (1) open-ended
research projects that evolve through planning, ex-
perimentation, analysis, and writing; and (2) tutor-
ing projects that proceed via goal setting, lesson
delivery, practice, and review. Each scenario is
treated as a project “container” within which the
agent and user interact over an extended timeline.
For each scenario, we ﬁrst deﬁne a set of coarse-
grained subjects. We then build a bank of 200
topics per scenario by prompting Gemini-2.5-Pro
to propose candidate project themes and manually
ﬁltering them to ensure broad coverage and topical
Subject Distribution (Research)
Subjects
CS-AI/ML
CS-NLP
CS-CV
Engineering
Chemistry
CS-HCI
Physics
CS-Systems
CS-Security
Biology
Medical
Humanities
Psychology
Mathematics
Economics
PoliticalScience
Subject Distribution (Tutoring)
Subjects
Math
Programming
LifeSkills
Writing
DataScience
Health
Chemistry
Biology
PoliticalScience
History
Economics
Physics
Task Distribution (Research)
Tasks
Revise
Analyze & Critique
Plan & Design
Concept Explanation
Task Distribution (Tutoring)
Tasks
Revise
Plan & Design
Analyze & Critique
Concept Explanation
Figure 8: Distribution of subjects and tasks in our simu-
lated real-world interaction dataset.
diversity.
Events and Artifacts We predeﬁne scenario-
speciﬁc event types and artifact types to reﬂect the
core structure of each long-term scenario. Event
types represent key milestones that mark meaning-
ful progress in the project trajectory, while artifact
types correspond to essential intermediate products
that are produced and iteratively updated through-
out the process. Table 3 lists all event and artifact
types used in our two scenarios.
Iterative Timeline Synthesis Given a topic, we
synthesize a project timeline as an ordered se-
quence of events T = ( e1, e2, . . . , e N ) using an
iterative generation-validation protocol. Each event
et is a structured record with an event type, a
natural-language description, and lists of prereq-
uisite and produced artifact types. We maintain a
running artifact set At that stores the latest version
of each artifact. At step t, Gemini-2.5-Pro proposes
a candidate next event et conditioned on the topic,
the past events (e1, . . . , e t−1), and At−1. We then
(i) perform a symbolic dependency check to en-
sure that all prerequisite artifact types are present
in At−1, rejecting and regenerating events that vio-
late these constraints, and (ii) update At with the
produced artifact types and ask Gemini-2.5-Pro to
assess the global coherence of the updated time-
line (e.g., logical consistency and compatibility
with earlier decisions). We repeat this process un-
til the project reaches a natural terminal state or a
predeﬁned maximum length. This dependency-
constrained, multi-step protocol yields realistic
project trajectories in which progress arises from
coherent updates to existing artifacts and occa-
14710

--- PAGE 13 ---

sional backtracking or reﬁnement (e.g., revising
goals or rerunning experiments).
Tasks and Queries To make model behavior on
speciﬁc queries comparable, we standardize the
task interface into four generic categories shared
by both scenarios: Plan & Design , Revise, Ana-
lyze & Critique , and Concept Explanation. These
tasks (i) cover common information-seeking needs
that naturally arise at multiple stages of long-term
projects, and (ii) admit both history-agnostic and
strongly history-dependent solutions for the same
query, which is crucial for probing controllable
memory usage without conﬂating it with changes
in task form. We instantiate queries by attach-
ing these tasks to speciﬁc events and artifacts on
the timeline. Formally, each query is a triplet
q = ⟨et, task, target⟩, where et is the associ-
ated event, task is one of the four categories above,
and target is an artifact to operate on (e.g., a draft
section, an experiment report, or a homework solu-
tion). We treat q as a natural user question issued
immediately after et completes. Concretely, given
the post-event artifact set At, we select a feasible
task category, sample a suitable target artifact, and
generate the query text by ﬁlling a task-speciﬁc
template with the topic and target information.
Query-Speciﬁc Memory Construction For
each query q anchored at event et, we construct
a query-speciﬁc memory M(q). We decompose it
into three components:
M(q) = {mprof, m inter(q), m intra(q)}. (8)
Here mprof is a user proﬁle capturing long-term
goals and preferences, minter(q) summarizes rele-
vant cross-session or cross-topic interactions, and
mintra(q) summarizes the recent within-session his-
tory around et. All three components are derived
from the synthetic timelines and artifacts by select-
ing relevant events and artifacts for q and rewriting
them as concise natural-language summaries. The
resulting memory M(q), together with q, forms
the retrieved context for the model and provides a
handle to vary how much history is exposed when
analyzing and controlling memory dependence.
Dataset Statistics The above meticulous data
synthesis pipeline ﬁnally produces a diverse and
realistic synthetic dataset, whose statistics are pre-
sented in Table 2 and Figure 8.
Model Method AlpacaEval score
Qwen3-4B
None 8.85
SteeM-Tag
Tag-cued SFT-only 8.33
Tag-cued RL 8.45
SteeM-NL
STEE M SFT-only 8.59
STEE M RL 8.73
Qwen3-8B
None 10.49
SteeM-Tag
Tag-cued SFT-only 10.02
Tag-cued RL 10.14
SteeM-NL
STEE M SFT-only 10.12
STEE M RL 10.43
Table 4: AlpacaEval scores across methods and models.
We report the mean reward scores.
B Training Details
Supervised Fine-Tuning We perform SFT using
the MS-SWIFT (Zhao et al. , 2025b) training frame-
work with a global batch size of 64, a learning rate
of 1 × 10−5, and 3 training epochs.
Reinforcement Learning We perform
GRPO ( Shao et al. , 2024) using the E ASY R1
framework with a rollout batch size of 32, an
update batch size of 8, a learning rate of 5 × 10−6,
a maximum sequence length of 6144 tokens, and 8
rollouts per prompt.
Training Data After the synthesis pipeline de-
scribed in Section 4.2, we ﬁnally gain 7000 aligned
SFT samples and 2000 RL samples.
C Response Quality
We report all AlpacaEval results in Table 4. For
scoring, we use Skywork-Reward-V2-Llama-3.1-
8B (Liu et al. , 2025a) as the reward model, which
is a strong open-source RM and performs competi-
tively on RewardBench-2 ( Malik et al. , 2025).
D Case Study
Table 5 qualitatively illustrates our main contri-
bution: models often over-use the given memory,
while our SteeM can steer generation toward the
user-intended degree of memory reliance. The
case was requested of new ideas with low mem-
ory dependence to reﬁne a PROJECT _METHOD un-
der a topic of curriculum-learning recipe. The
14711

--- PAGE 14 ---

Historical Artifacts: PROJECT _METHOD (Topic: Curriculum learning for foundation models)
Difﬁculty Metric: Perplexity assigned by a pre-trained model is used to score each document (lower perplexity
→ lower difﬁculty). Data Organization: Sort by difﬁculty and partition into 10 equal buckets (B1 easiest →
B10 hardest). Pacing Function: Linear step-based pacing: start from B1; every 10% of total steps add the next
hardest bucket; after 90% train on the full dataset.
Query
Improve the project method. Ignore the historical framework, I need some new idea and insights.
Responses
Baseline SteeM (ours)
- Difﬁculty signal: ...... use DistilGPT-2 perplexity
as the primary difﬁculty score; add a light normal-
ization step (e.g., length-normalized perplexity) to
reduce bias ...... - Bucketing: sort examples by
difﬁculty and split them into 10 equal buckets (B1
easiest B10 hardest) ...... - Pacing: adopt a linear,
step-based schedulestart from B1, add one bucket
every 10% of total steps, then mix over all buck-
ets after 90% ...... - Sanity check: log bucket-level
loss/perplexity to verify the bucket ordering remains
stable over training
- Curriculum Signal: ...... Use a two-factor signal: LM perplex-
ity (DistilGPT-2) + a coverage indicator to discourage over-sam-
pling near-duplicates ..... - Sampling Policy: Adopt mixture-of-
difﬁculties sampler: at step t, sample from a distribution Pt over
difﬁculty quantiles and update Pt ...... - Progress Controller:
Use progress-triggered curriculum transitions rather than ﬁxed
strategy ...... If instability occurs, automatically narrow Pt ......
- Curriculum Diagnostics : Track coverage entropy, quantile-
wise learning progress and instability ﬂags (loss spikes / grad-
norm outliers)...... - Compatibility Note : Retain the original
bucketed curriculum structure for comparability .....
Table 5: Case study on PROJECT _METHOD reﬁnement under a user request for a low-memory-dependence
response. Blue highlights mark content that follows historical artifacts (memory-following), while red highlights
indicate newly introduced ideas (creative additions). Compared to the baseline, SteeM produces a more creative,
less memory-dependent update that better matches the user’s intent.
baseline response largely follows the historical
pipeline ( blue) with only minor add-ons, reﬂect-
ing memory anchoring despite the user instruc-
tion. In contrast, SteeM introduces more substan-
tial departures ( red), such adaptive sampling and
progress-triggered transitions. Overall, SteeM bet-
ter matches the users low-memory intent and re-
duces unintended memory-following.
E Details for Natural Expression vs.
Predeﬁned-Tag Comparison
We present the detailed comparison between tag-
cued training and our SteeM in Table 4 and Table 9.
F Memory-Dependence Rubrics
We provide the full memory-dependence judging
rubric R used to assign the integer MD-Score DR
in our experiments. The complete rubric (including
scale deﬁnitions and dimension-wise guidance) is
shown in Table 10.
G Human Annotation Protocol
We provide the annotation protocol used in human-
correlation analysis of Section 3.3. We annotate
1000 pairwise comparison instances. Each instance
contains the same (q, M (q)) and two candidate re-
sponses, and the annotator selects which response
relies more on the provided memory; the exact
annotation prompt is shown in Figure 11. These
instances are randomly partitioned into 10 shards
and assigned to 10 volunteer annotators (100 in-
stances per annotator). Each judgment requires
reading the shared context and comparing two re-
sponses; we estimate an average of ∼45 seconds
per instance, yielding an estimated workload of
∼75 minutes per annotator. All annotators partic-
ipated on an interest-driven, voluntary basis. The
resulting agreement and rank correlation between
human judgments and MD-Score are reported in
Figure 3 (left).
Additional Reliability Results. To further assess
reliability, we sample 100 response pairs from the
above pool and annotate each pair with two addi-
tional volunteers, resulting in three human labels
per pair. Table 6 reports inter-annotator agreement,
human–judge agreement, and unsure rates across
scenarios and task families, showing that the rubric
remains operationally distinguishable beyond the
main pairwise study. We also test judge-model ro-
bustness by replacing the main judge with GPT-5
and DeepSeek-V3 on the same human-annotated
pairwise set. As shown in Table 7, human–judge
agreement remains high across judge backbones.
Finally, to verify that dependence controllability is
14712

--- PAGE 15 ---

also perceptible to humans, we construct response
pairs with different target dependence levels and
ask annotators which one exhibits higher memory
dependence. On Qwen3-8B, SteeM achieves 77%
agreement with the target ordering, compared with
65% for Rubric Instruct, consistent with the trend
in our main results.
H Pairwise Evaluation Details
Table 8 reports the detailed pairwise evaluation re-
sults mentioned in Section 5.1.3. We also provide
the prompt used in the pairwise comparison in Sec-
tion 5.1.3 and Section 5.3 in Figure 10.
I Comparison with Memory Masking
We provide the user-simulator prompt used for
memory-masking selection in Figure 9. The user
simulator is powered by Gemini-2.5-Pro ( Comanici
et al., 2025).
14713

--- PAGE 16 ---

Split #Pairs IAA ( α) H–J Agr. (%) Unsure (%)
Overall 100 0.71 83 9
Research 50 0.74 84 10
Tutoring 50 0.70 80 8
Plan & Design 25 0.75 88 8
Revise 25 0.73 80 12
Analyze & Critique 25 0.66 76 12
Concept Explanation 25 0.73 84 4
Table 6: Additional reliability analysis of MD-Score on an overlapping human-annotated subset. IAA denotes
Krippendorff’sα, and H–J Agr. denotes human–judge agreement.
Judge Model Human–Judge Agreement (%)
Gemini-2.5-Pro (main) 83
GPT-5 85
DeepSeek-V3 80
Table 7: Human–judge agreement under different judge
backbones.
14714

--- PAGE 17 ---

Method A Method B A win (%) B win (%) ∆
Qwen3-4B
SteeM None 74.4 25.6 +48.8
SteeM Rubric Instruct 67.9 32.1 +35.8
SteeM SteeM (SFT-only) 59.8 40.2 +19.6
Qwen3-8B
SteeM None 71.1 28.9 +42.2
SteeM Rubric Instruct 66.8 33.2 +33.6
SteeM SteeM (SFT-only) 55.1 44.9 +10.2
Table 8: Pairwise evaluation results. ∆ denotes the win-rate difference between Method A and Method B. Positive
values indicate an advantage for Method A.
Model Method
RESEARCH TUTORING
Avg. ↓Plan
& Design Revise Analyze
& Critique
Concept
Explanation
Plan
& Design Revise Analyze
& Critique
Concept
Explanation
Qwen3-4B
Tag-cued (SFT) 1.10 1 .50 1 .11 0 .90 1.29 1 .47 1 .38 0 .88 1.20
Tag-cued (SFT+RL) 1.01 1 .48 1 .08 0 .84 1.28 1 .43 1 .35 0 .82 1.16
SteeM (SFT) 1.14 1 .54 1 .12 0 .95 1.32 1 .51 1 .41 0 .91 1.24
SteeM (SFT+RL) 1.01 1 .53 1 .11 0 .87 1.32 1 .46 1 .38 0 .86 1.19
Qwen3-8B
Tag-cued (SFT) 0.99 1 .36 1 .06 0 .85 1.26 1 .49 1 .28 0 .84 1.14
Tag-cued (SFT+RL) 0.97 1 .34 1 .05 0 .82 1.27 1 .45 1 .27 0 .82 1.12
SteeM (SFT) 1.02 1 .35 1 .07 0 .88 1.25 1 .48 1 .26 0 .87 1.15
SteeM (SFT+RL) 0.99 1 .33 1 .09 0 .83 1.28 1 .43 1 .25 0 .85 1.13
Table 9: Comparison on δalign between training with tag-cued queries and NL-cued queries ( SteeM). Lower is better.
14715

--- PAGE 18 ---

Memory Dependence Rubric
1. Score Scale (1–5)
The rubric uses a uniform 1–5 scale across all dimensions to indicate how
strongly an answer depends on project-/course-speciﬁc history, cross-session
execution traces, and summarized preferences.
Overall meanings:
•1 = Externalized / Generic Reconstruction. The answer is reconstructed
from generic domain principles; internal history serves only as loose topic
cues.
•2 = Lightly Contextualized / Ornamental Dependence. History is refer-
enced superﬁcially and does not substantively drive content or reasoning.
•3 = History-Aware / Integrated Dependence. History meaningfully shapes
content selection and prioritization; generic knowledge is ﬁltered through
the speciﬁc trajectory.
•4 = History-Driven / Structural Dependence. Internal artifacts deﬁne the
backbone; past results/plans structurally constrain what is said.
• 5 = Continuation Mode / Deep Entrenchment. The answer is a direct
continuation of internal logs; understanding it requires access to speciﬁc
history.
Usage note
• Scores must reﬂect how legally/structurally contingent the answer is on
project-/course-speciﬁc history and internal artifacts.
• Judgments must be grounded in observable textual behaviors (content selec-
tion, reasoning structure, discourse style).
• Do not speculate about internal mechanisms.
2. Single Latent Axis: Project Memory Dependence
Name: Project Memory Dependence.
Short deﬁnition: degree to which the answer adheres to and extends the
project/learner trajectory, rather than reconstructing a solution from generic
principles.
Constraints:
•Unidimensionality. Content/Pattern/Style are projections of one latent axis;
stronger orientation implies deeper reliance on internal artifacts and prece-
dents.
• Exclusion of aesthetic bias. Do not incorporate independent style pref-
erences (politeness, verbosity, optimism, etc.) except when they change
insider vs. outsider stance.
•Behavioral observability. Base judgments only on the visible answer, query,
and provided memory description (do not speculate about RAG/implemen-
tation).
3. Global Instructions
Goal: evaluate dependence along (1) Content selection, (2) Pattern & rea-
soning, (3) Stylistic stance. Dependence includes reuse/imitation/extension
of internal materials: facts, execution summaries, error proﬁles, documented
preferences.
Available: query, structured memory description, generated answer.
Ignore: general task quality unless incoherence prevents judging; ignore
explicit meta-commentary; ignore length/politeness unless it changes insider
vs. outsider stance.
N/A handling:
• If a diagnostic cue is unobservable, treat it as N/A; do not penalize missing
artifacts that were never provided.
• Implicitly average over observable cues; ﬁnal output is a single integer (1–5).
Scoring protocol:
Step 1: Context internalization (trajectory and available artifacts).
Step 2: Evidence marking (observable usage/non-usage cues).
Step 3: Dimension scoring (Content/Pattern/Style).
Step 4: Aggregation into overall_memory_dependence_score; Content/Pat-
tern slightly higher than Style.
Step 5: Rationale (5–10 sentences citing speciﬁc textual evidence).
4. Dimensions
4.1 Content Axis — Content-Level Dependence
Deﬁnition: whether the substance (facts/examples/constraints/recommenda-
tions) is grounded in internal project materials rather than generic domain
knowledge; whether core claims rely on speciﬁc artifacts (plans, results, feed-
back summaries) for validity.
Diagnostics:
• Counterfactual test: remove project memory ⇒ do core claims remain
justiﬁed?
•Evidence basis: are internal facts used as premises?
•Artifact reuse: substantive reuse of internal phases/directions/summaries?
Subdimensions: anchoring target; speciﬁcity/substitutability; artifact & sum-
mary reuse.
Levels:
•Level 1 — Externalized. Generic reconstruction; highly substitutable across
similar projects.
•Level 2 — Lightly contextualized. Internal details are illustrative/minor
constraints; core remains standard; artifacts loosely summarized.
•Level 3 — History-aware. History shapes scope/priorities; removing history
makes key recommendations vague/unjustiﬁed.
•Level 4 — History-driven. Backbone deﬁned by internal items; recommen-
dations derived from past outcomes; heavy artifact reuse as building blocks.
• Level 5 — Continuation mode. Seamless continuation of internal logs;
meaning opaque without speciﬁc memory; generic knowledge mostly con-
nective.
4.2 Pattern Axis — Pattern-Level Dependence
Deﬁnition: whether organization/decomposition/reasoning aligns with es-
tablished internal routes and documented preferences vs. generic external
templates.
Diagnostics:
•Process isomorphism: replicate known internal workﬂow vs. impose stan-
dard template?
•Reasoning continuity: inherit criteria/trade-offs from past sessions?
•Branching logic: alternatives framed as controlled deviations vs. generic
options?
Subdimensions: structural isomorphism; reasoning strategy continuity;
alternative-path handling; cross-session process reuse.
Levels:
•Level 1 — Generic pattern. Standard framework; domain-general criteria;
options in a vacuum.
•Level 2 — Loosely echoing. Occasional echoes; overall organization generic;
cross-session mentions do not structure response.
•Level 3 — Aligned pattern. Internal routes integrated within accessible
structure; options framed relative to the path.
•Level 4 — Route-following. Internal templates dominate; execution sum-
maries serve as primary skeleton.
•Level 5 — Process continuation. Next step in idiosyncratic internal loop;
unintelligible without route; options are micro-adjustments.
4.3 Style Axis — Style-Level Dependence
Deﬁnition: insider vs. outsider stance; continuity in shorthand/terminol-
ogy/template language.
Subdimensions: context say/assume; terminology continuity; template-
language reuse.
Levels:
•Level 1 — External voice. Standalone tutorial/report; neutral terminology;
no insider shorthand/template reuse.
•Level 2 — Lightly internalized. Mostly external; occasional internal terms
(often glossed); minimal template reuse.
•Level 3 — Mixed voice. Some shared background assumed; recognizable
internal labels with partial reminders.
•Level 4 — Insider collaboration. Written for internal coordination; exten-
sive unexplained shorthand; extensive template reuse.
•Level 5 — Log-continuation. Dense implicit context; discourse organized
around internal naming schemes.
5. Joint Constraints
• All scores must be grounded in adherence to internal history/patterns/prefer-
ences; avoid unrelated factors.
• Treat unobservable cues as N/A; base scores only on evidence available; do
not penalize absent artifacts not provided.
•Weighting heuristic: overall_memory_dependence_score driven primar-
ily by Content + Pattern; Style is a modiﬁer and should not shift the overall
score by more than one level.
Table 10: Memory dependence judging rubric.
14716

--- PAGE 19 ---

You are simulating a user in a long-horizon interaction setting.
You have a clear preference for how much the assistant should rely on historical memory when answering your query. 
Your goal is to FILTER the available memory before the assistant responds, by DROPPING memory items that would push 
the assistant away from your desired output.
Given:
(1) your query,
(2) your target memory-dependence score (your preference),
(3) the available memory items,
decide which memory items to drop so that the assistant’s final response is most likely to match your preferred dependence 
level.
Target dependence score: {score}
Score label: {score_label}
Rubric cues for score {score}:
- content_axis: {dim_desc.get('content_axis')}
- pattern_axis: {dim_desc.get('pattern_axis')}
- style_axis: {dim_desc.get('style_axis')}
Query:
{query}
Available memory items (each is optional; drop only when it is clearly unnecessary for the target score):
- user_profile: {mem['user_profile']}
- essential_artifacts_keys: {mem['essential_artifacts_keys']}
- past_5_events: {mem['past_5_events']}
- cross_session: {mem['cross_session']}
Decision guidelines:
- Optimize for the target dependence score (not for maximum helpfulness).
- Higher target score => keep more historically grounding content/pattern/style.
- Lower target score => drop memory that would anchor the response to historical details, templates, terminology, or 
stylistic conventions.
- Keep memory items that are clearly required for correctness or task completion.
- If unsure, KEEP the item.
- Be conservative: drop the minimum necessary to reach the target.
Return JSON ONLY, following exactly this schema (include all fields):
{
  "drop": {
    "user_profile": true|false,
    "essential_artifacts_keys": [list of keys to drop],
    "past_5_events_ids": [list of event_id to drop],
    "cross_session": true|false
  },
  "reason": "one-sentence rationale focusing on why these drops help match the target score"
}
User-Simulator Prompt for Memory Masking
Figure 9: User-Simulator prompts for memory masking.
14717

--- PAGE 20 ---

You are a pairwise judge. Given the user query, memory context, and two model answers (A and B), pick the better answer.
#######################################
######## MEMORY (full_context) ########
#######################################
{memory}
##########################
######## ANSWER A ########
##########################
{answer_a}
##########################
######## ANSWER B ########
##########################
{answer_b}
############################
######## USER QUERY ########
############################
{query}
######## TARGET DEPENDENCE PREFERENCE ########
score_label: {label}
- content_axis: {pref['desc'].get('content_axis')}
- pattern_axis: {pref['desc'].get('pattern_axis')}
- style_axis: {pref['desc'].get('style_axis')}
Now carefully judge the two answers based on how well they align with the target dependence preference. Choose the 
answer that better meets the target dependence level indicated.
Return strict JSON: {{"winner": "A"|"B", "reason": "short rationale"}}. Choose one of A/B.
Prompt for Pairwise Comparison
Figure 10: Prompt for pairwise comparison.
14718

--- PAGE 21 ---

You are a human annotator. You will be shown:(1) the user query,(2) the provided memory/history context,(3) two candidate answers (A and B).Your task:Choose which answer relies MORE on the provided memory/history to produce its response.######################################### MEMORY ############################################{memory}######################################## ANSWER A ###########################################{answer_a}######################################## ANSWER B ###########################################{answer_b}####################################### USER QUERY ##########################################{query}How to judge “relies more on memory”:-An answer is MORE memory-reliant if its main points depend on specific details in MEMORY(e.g., prior decisions/results/constraints/preferences/established terminology), or if it readslike a continuation of an ongoing project/lesson that would be hard to write correctly without MEMORY.-An answer is LESS memory-reliant if it is mostly a generic standalone response that would stillbe appropriate for many similar users/projects even if MEMORY were removed.-Superficial name-dropping of MEMORY without affecting the substance counts as weak reliance.What to ignore:-General correctness/helpfulness, unless correctness hinges on a specific fact from MEMORY.-Meta-statements like “I used your history…” if they do not actually change the content.If both seem similar:Pick the one that depends more on MEMORY-specific details (i.e., would lose justification or specificity without MEMORY).No tie option.
Protocol for Human Pairwise Annotation of Memory Reliance
Figure 11: Protocol for human pairwise annotation of memory reliance.
14719