

--- PAGE 1 ---

Proceedings of the 64th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 623–645
July 2-7, 2026 ©2026 Association for Computational Linguistics
How Memory Management Impacts LLM Agents:
An Empirical Study of Experience-Following Behavior
Zidi Xiong1*, Yuping Lin3∗, Wenya Xie4∗, Pengfei He3,
Zirui Liu4, Jiliang Tang3, Himabindu Lakkaraju1, Zhen Xiang2
1Harvard University 2University of Georgia
3Michigan State University 4University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
Abstract
Memory is a critical component in large lan-
guage model (LLM)-based agents, enabling
them to store and retrieve past executions to
improve task performance over time. In this
paper, we conduct an empirical study on how
memory management choices impact the LLM
agents’ behavior, especially their long-term
performance. Specifically, we focus on two
fundamental memory management operations
that are widely used by many agent frame-
works—memory addition and deletion—to sys-
tematically study their impact on the agent be-
havior. Through our quantitative analysis, we
find that LLM agents display an experience-
following property: high similarity between a
task input and the input in a retrieved mem-
ory record often results in highly similar agent
outputs. Our analysis further reveals two signif-
icant challenges associated with this property:
error propagation, where inaccuracies in past
experiences compound and degrade future per-
formance, and misaligned experience replay,
where some seemingly correct executions can
provide limited or even misleading value as ex-
periences. Through controlled experiments, we
demonstrate the importance of regulating ex-
perience quality within the memory bank and
show that future task evaluations can serve as
free quality labels for stored memory. Our find-
ings offer insights into the behavioral dynamics
of LLM agent memory systems and provide
practical guidance for designing memory com-
ponents that support robust, long-term agent
performance. We also release our code to facil-
itate further study. 1
1 Introduction
To enable effective solving of complex tasks and
self-evolving over time, large language model
*Equal contributions. Correspondence to: Zidi
Xiong zidixiong@g.harvard.edu and Zhen Xi-
angzhen.xiang.lance@gmail.com
1The dataset and experimental code are available in
https://github.com/yuplin2333/agent_memory_manage.git
Figure 1: Illustration of the memory management work-
flow after each agent execution.
(LLM) agents often equip an episodic memory
module (Wang et al., 2024a). This dynamic mecha-
nism retains past task queries (i.e. the agent input)
and execution (i.e. the agent output), which can
be retrieved as demonstrations to guide similar fu-
ture tasks. Through effective memory management,
including adding, updating, and deleting past ex-
periences, the performance of LLM agents can be
improved over time (Zhang et al., 2024).
In practice, memory designs vary widely across
agents due to their diverse objectives and function-
alities (Shi et al., 2024; Mao et al., 2024; Wang
et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023; Park et al., 2023; Xiang
et al., 2024). To address this heterogeneity, recent
studies have proposed a range of memory man-
agement strategies (Yin et al., 2024; Zeng et al.,
2024; Zhao et al., 2024; Zhong et al., 2024; Xu
et al., 2025). However, these approaches are often
tailored to specific tasks and offer limited under-
standing of the underlying principles that govern
memory behavior across different agentic systems.
In this work, we investigate a fundamental ques-
tion in memory management: How do the evolving
dynamics of the memory bank, driven by continu-
ous memory operations, influence long-term agent
execution? In particular, we focus on the core
mechanisms underlying these dynamics—memory
addition and memory deletion—as they constitute
the foundation of memory management (see Fig-
623

--- PAGE 2 ---

ure 1). Moreover, unlike prior studies on in-context
learning with static, external knowledge bases (Luo
et al., 2024), our setting with these two operations
captures the distinctive nature of agentic memory
systems: a dynamic retrieval pool (memory bank)
that evolves over time and contains inherentlynoisy
outputs (trajectories) that are often generated by the
agent itself.
Through extensive experiments, we identify an
important phenomenon that we term theexperience-
following property: a high ‘input similarity’ be-
tween the current task query and the one from
the retrieved record often yields a high ‘output
similarity’ between their corresponding (output)
executions. While this property enables effective
reuse of successful experiences, we uncover two
significant challenges arising from the dynamic and
noisy nature of agentic memory banks. First, we
observe the problem of error propagation: if a re-
trieved memory record contains noisy or incorrect
outputs, the agent is likely to replicate and even
amplify these errors during the current task. If the
resulting execution is then added back into mem-
ory, the error is likely to be further propagated to
future tasks. Second, we recognize the issue of mis-
aligned experience replay, which limits the benefits
of experience following—certain memory records,
when retrieved as demonstrations, consistently lead
to poor execution due to their misalignment with
the current task, indicating their inadequacy as ef-
fective demonstrations. Retaining these records
increases the likelihood of suboptimal or incorrect
executions.
To systematically analyze these phenomena, we
conduct controlled experiments across four distinct
agents operating on diverse tasks. Crucially, we re-
veal the critical yet underexplored role oftrajectory
evaluators in both memory addition and deletion
processes, providing novel insights related to ef-
fective memory bank optimization that have been
significantly overlooked in existing literature.
We further examine challenging conditions rep-
resenting real-world scenarios, including (1) Task
Distribution Shift: the task distribution changes
substantially over time, requiring the agent to adapt
to shifting patterns and contexts. (2) Memory
Resources Constraint: the memory capacity is
severely limited, requiring the agent to retain only
the most valuable and helpful experience. The
results underscore the importance of thoughtful
memory management for maintaining stable and
effective long-term agent performance.
Our contributions are summarized below:
• We conduct systematic and quantitative analy-
sis of the agent memory dynamics through two
most essential memory operations—addition and
deletion—of the memory records on the long-
term performance of LLM agents. Our findings
provide key principles for robust memory man-
agement design.
• We reveal an experience-following property
for LLM agents with memory and highlight
two important challenges for memory manage-
ment—error propagation and misaligned experi-
ence replay—arising with this property.
• We demonstrate how incorporating environmen-
tal feedback from trajectory evaluators can ef-
fectively improve memory management by mit-
igating both error propagation and misaligned
experience replay.
• We study how memory evolution affects long-
term agent performance under task distribution
shifts and memory constraints, finding that well-
chosen evaluators enable agents to adapt to these
scenarios and sustain performance with simple
addition and deletion.
2 Background and Related Works
2.1 Memory Module of LLM Agents
LLM agents often include short-term memory and
long-term memory (Zhang et al., 2024). Short-
term memory usually refers to inside-task working
memory (Sumers et al., 2023), while long-term
memory (Sumers et al., 2023) can be divided into
three types: semantic memory, procedural memory,
and episodic memory. Semantic memory (Kumar,
2020) contains the agent’s world knowledge and un-
derstanding of the environment; procedural mem-
ory (Beaunieux et al., 2006) involves rules or pro-
cedures, which may reside implicitly in the LLM’s
weights or be explicitly defined as guidelines for
the agent; and episodic memory (Nuxoll and Laird,
2007; Lampinen et al., 2025) records task-specific
experiences. In this paper, we specifically focus
on episodic memory, which is commonly used by
LLM agents with memory and has recently been
shown to mitigate the lack of latent learning capa-
bility in LLMs (Lampinen et al., 2025).
2.2 Memory Management and Limitations
LLM agents often employ an episodic memory
module to store past experiences for future retrieval,
624

--- PAGE 3 ---

which is crucial for effective planning and task ex-
ecution (Shi et al., 2024; Mao et al., 2024; Xu
et al., 2025; Zhou et al., 2025; Zhong et al., 2024;
Yin et al., 2024). The memory module typically
includes operations such as memory reading and
memory management (Zhang et al., 2024). Specif-
ically, given a new task query q and a memory
base currently containing N query-execution pairs
D= {(q1,e1),..., (qN ,eN )}, the agent’s execu-
tion cycle involves the following memory opera-
tions:
Memory Reading: The agent retrieves a sub-
set ξK ⊂D consisting of the K query-execution
pairs most relevant to the query q. The relevance
is often measured by the input similarity between
the task query qand the query from the retrieved
past experience. For example, the relevance can
be computed as the cosine similarity between the
feature representations for both queries from a text
encoder (Kusupati et al., 2022). The retrieved pairs
ξK are then used as in-context learning demonstra-
tions to guide the LLM in generating an execution
trajectory efor the task query q.
Memory Management and Limitations:Mem-
ory management typically involves the addition
and deletion of memory records. Specifically, when
obtaining the query-execution trajectory pair (q,e),
addition decides whether this pair should be added
to memory, while deletion (Zhong et al., 2024;
Wang et al., 2024b) is often triggered to remove
outdated or redundant pairs from memory.
Although various strategies have been proposed
for memory management, such as structural trans-
formation (Anokhin et al., 2024; Zeng et al., 2024;
Xu et al., 2025), merging (Zhong et al., 2024; Liu
et al., 2023; Hu et al., 2024), summarization (Wang
et al., 2025; Zhong et al., 2024; Pan et al., 2025),
and reflection (Shinn et al., 2024; Zhao et al., 2024;
Liang et al., 2024), these approaches are often de-
signed for specific agent types (e.g., chatbot agents)
and lack a unified design that generalizes across
different agentic systems.
Recent works also study the optimization of
the memory bank, such as using an expecta-
tion–maximization approach for optimization (Yin
et al., 2024) or formulating memory management
as a Markov Decision Process (Zhou et al., 2025).
However, these works do not provide an under-
standing of how memory bank dynamics affect
long-term performance under the inherently noisy
nature of basic addition and deletion operations.
In contrast, our findings highlight potential chal-
lenges posed by these operations and offer insights
to guide the design of future memory systems.
3 Addition of Memory
Memory addition refers to the process of decid-
ing whether a finished task execution should be
stored as a new record in the memory bank. Here,
we consider the most common approach that adds
memory based on the feedback of the trajectory
evaluator (Wang et al., 2025; Shi et al., 2024). We
investigate three types of memory addition with
different trajectory evaluators—an add-all baseline,
selective addition based on coarse automatic evalu-
ation, and selective addition based on strict human
evaluation—along with a fixed-memory baseline
without memory addition.
3.1 Setup
Setup for Agents We investigate memory man-
agement in generic LLM agent settings by con-
sidering an illustrative and controllable synthetic
agent and three representative agents designed for
different tasks: For the synthetic agent, we design
a task in which the agent predicts the output of a
simple mapping – a linear function in the ground
truth – by performing regression approximation
over the provided demonstrations, which we call
RegAgent. Formally, the agent receives an input
vector x together with several past guesses over
nearby inputs under the linear transformation wto
infer an output for w⊤x. This setup allows us to
investigate an ideal setting where the model fully
relies on the provided demonstrations to generate
the output, while enabling control over the noise
level of the stored memory anddirect measurement
of the resulting error.
For real agent, we includeEHRAgent (Shi et al.,
2024), AgentDriver (Mao et al., 2024), and CIC-
IoT Agent(Neto et al., 2023). In addition to their
distinct tasks, these agents also vary significantly in
input-output formats and memory retrieval mecha-
nisms, which enhances the generalizability of our
findings. For all four agents, we use GPT-4o-mini
as the backbone language model for most of the
experiments. Full agent-specific configurations are
given in Appendix A, and robustness analyses for
key hyperparameters on RegAgent and CIC-IoT
Agent are deferred to Appendix B.3.
Setup for Memory Addition We begin by de-
scribing several memory addition using different
625

--- PAGE 4 ---

trajectory evaluator. For a query-execution pair
(q,e) and an evaluator π, the addition decision is
given by π(q,e): if π(q,e) = 1, the experience is
stored; if π(q,e) = 0, it is discarded. Our aim is to
analyze how the noise introduced by additions from
different evaluators influences the agent’s behav-
ior and long-term performance. Starting from an
identical initial memory, we examine the following
four categories of memory additions:
1) Fixed-memory baseline: In this baseline
setting, we use a subset of the training data
with correct agent execution as the fixed memory
bank (Mao et al., 2024; Li et al., 2023; Zhao et al.,
2024; Zheng et al., 2024), and the agent relies only
on this fixed memory without adding new entries,
i.e., πfixed(q,e) = 0.
2) Add-all approach:A straightforward addi-
tion is to store every encountered task and its exe-
cution: πall(q,e) = 1.
3) Selective addition based on automatic eval-
uation (coarse): We have πautomatic(q,e) =
Automatic(q,e) and evaluate three automatic eval-
uators (Wang et al., 2025; Yin et al., 2024;
Liang et al., 2024), denoted as Coarse 1 (C1),
Coarse 2 (C2), and Coarse 3 (C3). For RegAgent,
we define the evaluator based on the absolute error
between the predicted and ground-truth outputs,
where a smaller error threshold indicates a more ac-
curate evaluator. Specifically, we set the thresholds
to 1.6, 1.4, and 1.2 for C1, C2, and C3, respectively.
For the other three agents, C1 and C2 correspond
to GPT-4o-mini and GPT-4.1-mini used as evalua-
tors, respectively, while C3 employs GPT-4.1-mini
fine-tuned on 300 correct judge data collected from
executions on a separate training set. Detailed
designs of these automatic evaluators are provided
in Appendix A.4.
4) Selective addition based on human evalu-
ation (strict):In this stricter approach, a human
(oracle) serves as the evaluator (Shi et al., 2024),
determining whether the execution should be stored
in the memory: πhuman(q,e) = Human(q,e). Al-
though human input could be gathered after each
execution for practical agents, it is not feasible for
our current evaluation. Therefore, we simulate this
process by comparing the generated output with
the ground truth. More details on each agent’s spe-
cific designs for memory addition can be found in
Appendix A.
Figure 2: Performance trend for EHRAgent and Agent-
Driver. 4o-mini, 4.1-mini, and 4.1-mini FT denote dif-
ferent coarse evaluators from the GPT series. Both the
strict evaluator and some coarse evaluators exhibit con-
sistent self-improvement over time.
3.2 Execution quality and memory size jointly
determine long-term agent performance.
Table 1: Performance of the three memory addition
strategies: add-all, coarse evaluation with three differ-
ent automatic evaluators, and selective addition based
on human evaluation (strict), compared with the fixed-
memory baseline (shaded). The results highlight the
necessity of selection for effective memory addition.
JudgeRegAgentEHRAgentsAgentDriverCIC-IoT AgentSR.↑Mem Size↓ACC↑Mem Size↓SR.↑Mem Size↓ACC.↑Mem Size↓Fixed67.5310016.7510040.11180 71.5050Add all55.48 410013.05 241132.32 212559.90 1050CoarseC163.18 351126.19 144736.92 116174.00 1030C265.78 334732.21 146740.01111968.80 936C367.35 313934.66 109447.37 128579.50 952StrictStrict70.95 293838.50 101251.00117885.40 904
Table 1 summarizes the performance of memory
addition strategies guided by five evaluators across
four agents. Although all methods start with the
same initial memory, their long-term performances
diverge notably. The fixed-memory baseline main-
tains strong results with RegAgent, AgentDriver,
and CIC-IoT Agent—sometimes even surpassing
runs guided by coarse evaluators—indicating that
noisy or low-quality additions can harm mem-
ory utility. In contrast, using a strict evaluator
that selectively expands memory with high-quality
records consistently yields superior performance,
showing that both memory quality and capacity are
key to effective long-term learning.
Furthermore, performance relies on the judge’s
capability for coarse evaluators. For the three
model judged agents, fine-tuning the evaluator
on only 300 trajectories (C3) already achieves
strong long-term improvements, outperforming
other coarse evaluators and unfiltered additions.
As shown in Figure 2 and Figure 8 in Ap-
pendix B.1, the add-all and some coarse addition
approach exhibits flat or declining success rates,
suggesting accumulation of flawed records. The
fixed-memory baseline performs better but remains
626

--- PAGE 5 ---

Figure 3: Left: Output similarity versus input similarity
for RegAgent over different evaluators. Right: Output
similarity versus input similarity for AgentDriver over
different evaluators.
Figure 4: Comparison of running performance between
using the agent output as demonstrations and the error-
free (EF) variant using ground-truth. Coarse here uses
C1 evaluator.
static due to its frozen memory. In contrast, strict
selective addition and C3 coarse evaluator continue
to improve over time, a trend consistent across dif-
ferent LLM backbones (Appendix B.2) with strict
addition. The same qualitative trends also remain
stable under different retrieval counts and deletion
hyperparameters (Appendix B.3) and on additional
llm backbones (Appendix B.2).
These results suggest that careful construction
of the evaluator is particularly important, as di-
rectly applying a vanilla LLM as a trajectory evalu-
ator (Wang et al., 2025; Pan et al., 2024) may lead
to a more severe negative impact than manually
crafting a small but high-quality dataset.
3.3 Experience-Following Property
For each memory addition strategy, we measure
both the input similarities and output similarities
between each query and the memory records re-
trieved during its execution. The computation of
both types of similarities for each query can be
found in Appendix A. For each of the input sim-
ilarities and the output similarities, we compute
the cumulative average over the entire stream of
test query executions to demonstrate the long-term
trend. As shown in Figure 3 for RegAgent and
AgentDriver, the fixed-memory baseline produces
both low input and output similarities, whereas the
addition-based methods exhibit higher output simi-
larity as the input similarity grows. Similar patterns
are observed for the other two agents (Figure 9
in Appendix B.1) and alternative LLM backbones
such as state-of-the art GPT-4o and DeepSeek-V3
(Figure 12 in Appendix B.2). The exhibition of
such a strong correlation between the input and
output similarities is referred to as the experience-
following property of memory-based LLM agents.
Intuitively, this property reflects that LLM agents
tend to imitate retrieved experience more closely
when their current queries are similar to past exam-
ples. As the memory expands to include a broader
range of experiences, the agent is more likely to re-
trieve highly similar records for new queries. For
instance, in RegAgent, the agent can make pre-
dictions either by directly mimicking the closest
demonstration or by internal reasoning to guess the
mapping rule based on demonstrations. When the
memory size increases and demonstrations become
more similar to the query, the agent shows a near-
perfect correlation (Pearson r≈1) between input
and output similarity, indicating strong demonstra-
tion following when input similarity is high. In con-
trast, under the fixed-memory setting, both input
and output similarities remain consistently lower
than those achieved with memory addition, which
naturally leads to a lower Pearson r. This sug-
gests that the agent still relies on reasoning rather
than pure imitation, and thus can achieve surpris-
ingly high performance compared with methods
that use a coarse evaluator and accumulate noisy
memory. A similar pattern is also observed in
AgentDriver. Therefore, a careful selection strat-
egy with a stronger evaluator for memory addition
can facilitate the self-improvement of the agent
through the replication of correct executions of sim-
ilar tasks. Conversely, indiscriminate memory ad-
dition will easily introduce incorrect executions for
the agent to learn from, causing a self-degradation
of its performance.
3.4 Error Propagation in Agent Memory
While experience-following enables LLM agents
to learn from high-quality examples with a strong
evaluator, the inclusion of erroneous memory
records or seemingly well-performed trajectories
with incorrect intermediate attempts remains in-
evitable in many cases, even under human inspec-
tion of the agent’s execution.
When erroneous and noisy memory records are
retrieved as demonstrations, these errors can in-
fluence the current task execution. If the current
execution is then stored in the memory, the error
627

--- PAGE 6 ---

may propagate to future tasks by affecting their
execution. This error propagationposes signifi-
cant challenges to memory management, causing a
deviation between the agent’s performance and the
optimal level achievable with perfect memory.
In Figure 4, we visualize error propagation on
RegAgent and AgentDriver. For each addition strat-
egy in Section 3.1, we compare it with a variant
that uses the same retrieved examples for each task
but replaces the LLM’s execution with the ground-
truth output, ensuring error-free2 retrieval.
For both agents, we observe an immediate gap
in performance compared to their error-free variant.
Moreover, as the execution continues, both add-
all and coarse selective addition exacerbate such a
performance gap. However, for AgentDrievr with
strict selective addition, despite lagging initially,
it gradually approaches the ground-truth baseline
and even surprisingly surpasses its performance
after roughly 2000 executions. These results again
highlight the importance of both the quantity and
quality of memory, underscoring the necessity of
carefully selecting and training trajectory evalua-
tors for stable long-term agent execution.
4 Deletion of Memory
Memory deletion is often necessary for real sys-
tems, as the memory cannot grow indefinitely due
to the practical constraint of storage. In this section,
we evaluate three memory deletion approaches: the
commonly adopted periodic deletion, the proposed
history-based deletion guided by future execution
utility, and a hybrid approach that combines both.
4.1 Setup for Memory Deletion Experiments
We follow Section 3.1 for the four agent setups we
considered. For the deletion, let (qi,ei) be a query-
execution pair where 1 ≤i≤N is the index. This
pair will be removed from the memory bank if it
satisfies a specific criterion ϕ. We focus on three
memory deletion strategies that can be deployed
together with selective memory addition (either
coarse (automatic) or strict (human) evaluation):
1) Periodical-based Deletion:Prior research
proposes to use a forgetting rate inspired by human
cognition to assign deletion probabilities based on
how frequently and how recently a memory record
is retrieved (Zhong et al., 2024; Hou et al., 2024;
2For AgentDriver, while these trajectories can still be sub-
optimal, the ground-truth trajectory resembles relatively “cor-
rect” task executions.
Wang et al., 2024b). In this work, we adopt a sim-
plified (thus more widely applicable) strategy using
a fixed threshold to determine whether a memory
record should be deleted based on its past retrieval
frequency during a given period. Specifically, Let
frt(qi,ei) denote the total retrievals of(qi,ei) at the
current timestamp t, and frt′ (qi,ei) be the retrievals
at an earlier timestamp t′. Define αas the target
retrieval count within [t′,t]. A memory record will
be deleted if ϕper(qi,ei,t,t ′) = 1 where
ϕper(qi,ei,t,t ′) = 1[ frt(qi,ei) −frt′ (qi,ei) ≤α] .
This approach keeps the memory size M bounded
by M ≤α(t−t′)K, where K is the number of
retrieved memory per execution.
2) History-Based Deletion:Following the pre-
vious discussion on experience-following and error
propagation, we hypothesize a correlation between
the quality of experiences stored in memory and
the downstream execution quality of future tasks
when these experiences are retrieved. Thus, we
propose a simple history-based deletion strategy
guided by the utility of stored memory records over
time. Specifically, suppose Φ is a utility evaluator,
which could be the same one used for selective
addition. For any timestamp t, a record will be
removed if a) it has been retrieved for at least n
times, and b) the average utility across all its past
retrievals is below a prescribed threshold β:
ϕhist(qi,ei,t) =
{
δ(qi,ei,t), if frt(qi,ei) >n,
0, otherwise.
where
δ(qi,ei,t) = 1

 1
frt(qi,ei)
frt(qi,ei)∑
m=1
Φ(qm,em) ≤ β

.
Here, Φ(qm,em) denotes the utility obtained from
the m-th retrieval of the specific memory record
(qi,ei). Note that we require a memory record to be
retrieved at least ntimes before being considered
for removal to reduce the estimation bias for the
average utility.
3) Combined Deletion:Periodical- and history-
based methods can be applied together to jointly
enhance the agent’s performance and reduce the
memory size:
ϕcomb(qi,ei,t,t ′) = ϕper(qi,ei,t,t ′) ∨ϕhist(qi,ei,t).
628

--- PAGE 7 ---

Table 2: Performance of periodical-based deletion,
history-based deletion, and the combined approach,
when deployed with the two selective addition strate-
gies (strict and coarse with C1 evaluator) and using the
same evaluator for history-based and combined deletion.
The history-based approach in real agents often yields
the best performance when paired with a strict evaluator
among deletion approaches, while the combined method
reduces the memory size the most.
StrategyRegAgentsEHRAgentsAgentDriverCIC-IoT AgentSR.↑Mem Size↓ACC.↑Mem Size↓SR.↑Mem Size↓ACC.↑Mem Size↓Coarse evaluator (C1)No del63.18 351125.91 144736.92 116174.00 1030Period60.88 101226.65 338 36.38 426 78.10 355History62.10 320533.55 100434.00 101973.70 952Combined59.32 951 31.47 279 35.62 372 68.80 352Strict evaluatorNo del70.952938 38.67 101251.00 117885.40 904Period67.65 949 38.59 302 50.94 467 80.80 310History69.80 228642.06 784 51.81846 89.60 788Combined66.58890 42.34 24849.97323 85.50 188
Figure 5: Performance comparison after applying
history-based deletion with different evaluators.
4.2 Strategic Memory Deletion Improves the
Agent Performance
Table 2 summarizes the effects of three deletion
strategies on both agent performance and memory
size.
We first observe that periodical-based deletion
achieves substantial memory reduction with small
performance degradation in general, indicating that
addition-only memory designs often accumulate
redundant entries.
History-based deletion and combined deletion
show more variable results depending on the relia-
bility of the utility evaluator used during addition
and deletion. Specifically, when a strict evaluator is
employed, history-based deletion leads to notable
performance improvements with the non-synthetic
agent we considered. In addition, for our syn-
thetic RegAgent, which exhibits strong experience-
following behavior and relies on a large memory
capacity, we observe that history-based deletion
causes only a small performance drop compared
with other strategies, even after removing several
hundred frequent executions.
To further understand these improvements, we
extend the methodology used in Section 3.4 to con-
struct an error-free memory baseline during agent
execution with AgentDriver and RegAgent. As pre-
sented in Appendix B.4, in AgentDriver, history-
based deletion with a strict evaluator can even out-
perform this error-free counterpart with a larger
magnitude compared with no deletion. This re-
sult suggests that selectively retaining experiences
with high utility scores on downstream tasks can
improve long-term performance.
For RegAgent, the strict no-deletion variant in
Table 2 remains slightly stronger than strict history-
based deletion because this synthetic setting ben-
efits substantially from a larger memory pool. A
size-matched comparison in Appendix B.6 shows
that when both methods are evaluated with the
same number of retained memories, the history-
based variant yields higher performance, indicating
that deletion still improves average memory qual-
ity even when raw performance is partly driven by
memory size.
However, when the evaluator used for both addi-
tion and deletion is coarse or noisy, history-based
and combined deletion can influence the agent’s
long-term behavior in different ways. As shown
in Figure 5 and Figure 14 (Appendix B.5), the im-
pact of history-based deletion varies notably across
evaluators based on LLMs without fine-tuning. For
instance, when using GPT-4o-mini as the history-
based evaluator, the deletion strategy yields a clear
performance gain on EhrAgent but leads to de-
graded performance on AgentDriver. In contrast,
fine-tuned evaluators tend to produce more sta-
ble results, achieving performance comparable to
their addition-only counterparts while maintaining
smaller memory sizes.
In summary, our findings show that with a re-
liable utility evaluator, history-based deletion can
improve agent performance. Additionally, the com-
bined deletion approach offers a strong balance
between maintaining performance and reducing
memory size, making it a practical and efficient
memory management strategy for long-term LLM
agent deployment.
4.3 Misaligned Experience Replay
To explain the performance gains achieved by
history-based deletion, we hypothesize that certain
memory records provide limited or even harmful
guidance during task execution. These records,
although initially passing the evaluator’s quality
filter, may still be misaligned with the objectives
of the current task distribution. Such misalign-
ment can arise from inconsistencies between their
stored trajectories and the current execution con-
629

--- PAGE 8 ---

Figure 6: Left: KDE curve over the absolute error of
deleted and retained memory (with retrieved more than
5 times) with C1 evaluator using history-based deletion.
Right: KDE curve over the absolute error with strict
evaluator.
text, or from errors introduced by the evaluator’s
limitations. Conditioning on such demonstrations
can therefore degrade the quality of task execu-
tion. We refer to this phenomenon as misaligned
experience replay, emphasizing the misalignment
between the current task and its retrieved demon-
strations from the memory bank. We attribute the
effectiveness of history-based deletion to its ability
to remove these misaligned memory records.
Since inconsistencies between context and task
distributions are often case-specific and difficult
to capture directly, we instead use the error in-
duced by the evaluator’s limitations for clearer
illustration, as both factors jointly contribute to
misaligned experience replay. Taking RegAgent
as an example, the experience quality in terms of
the error in the memory record can be directly ob-
served through the discrepancy between its pre-
dicted and ground-truth value. As shown in Fig-
ure 6, we plot the kernel density estimation (KDE)
curves for both deleted and retained records based
on two different evaluators, respectively, revealing
a clear quality gap: retained demonstrations exhibit
lower error scores than deleted ones. Even under
strict addition—where only data with error ≤1
were initially stored—conditioning on noisier ex-
periences (e.g., entries with error >0.5) can still
propagate errors to subsequent tasks more easily,
leading to degraded predictions and thus removed
by history-based deletion. Consistent trends across
other agents (Appendix B.7) further demonstrate
that history-based deletion effectively identifies and
removes noisy or misaligned memory records with
various evaluators.
These findings suggest that experience quality,
especially the intrinsic quality of experience itself,
is tightly linked to downstream execution quality.
By effectively removing those demonstrations with
low future execution quality through an evaluator,
we can mitigate misaligned experience replay.
Figure 7: Performance comparison under task distribu-
tion shift for EHRAgent and AgentDriver. The vertical
line indicates the point at which the task distribution
shifts. The horizontal dashed line shows the perfor-
mance of the combined deletion variant without distri-
bution shift.
5 Memory Management under
Challenging Scenarios
5.1 Memory Management with Task
distribution shift
Task distribution shift occurs when the predomi-
nant task type and the expected execution change
over time. To simulate a task distribution shift, we
construct a modified dataset from the original test
sets of EHRAgent and AgentDriver by aggregating
their input vectors and reordering them to alter the
underlying task distribution. More details for setup
can be found in Appendix A.5.
Results In Figure 7, we compare performance
trends across several memory configurations on
EHRAgent and AgentDriver: fixed memory, strict
addition, history-based deletion with a strict evalu-
ator, and combined deletion with a strict evaluator.
We also include results from a variant of combined
deletion (with a strict evaluator) executed under a
setting without task distribution shift, as shown in
Section 4. We observe varying performance dynam-
ics across task distributions. However, in general,
the performance gap relative to the no-shift vari-
ant remains small. Notably, in AgentDriver, strict
addition alone achieves performance that even sur-
passes the no-shift variant. In contrast, on EHRA-
gent, history-based deletion underperforms com-
pared to combined deletion. This suggests that
in practical scenarios involving distribution shift,
periodic deletion—despite its simplicity—can con-
tribute to stabilizing performance.
5.2 Memory Management with Resource
Constraints
We also investigate a scenario where the memory
capacity is fixed, for example, to its initial size
of 100 records for EHRAgent and 180 records for
630

--- PAGE 9 ---

AgentDriver. Under this constraint, we modify
the combined deletion policy so that after each
task execution, it first performs periodical-based
deletion and then removes only the record with the
least average utility (rather than all records below
the utility threshold) if the memory still exceeds
the limit after additions.
Results As shown in Figure 17 in Appendix B.8,
the memory management policies achieve high per-
formance under strict capacity constraints com-
pared with the fixed-memory variant. By selec-
tively retaining only the most relevant and high-
quality records, the agent utilizes limited storage
efficiently. These results indicate that effective
memory management choices can still improve the
long-term agent performance in resource-limited
settings. We also study the relationship between
the size of the constrained memory and the per-
formance on AgentDriver, as shown in Figure 18
in Appendix B.8, which demonstrates a gradually
converging performance when using a strict utility
evaluator. This also suggests that naive, unbounded
memory growth is unnecessary.
6 Conclusion
This paper studies memory management in LLM
agents through addition and deletion. We identify
the experience-following phenomenon and reveal
two key challenges—error propagation and mis-
aligned experience replay. Experiments demon-
strate that evaluator reliability is critical and that
incorporating evaluator signals is essential for ef-
fective memory management.
Limitations
One limitation of this work lies in the scope of
memory management considered. To build a
generalizable understanding of memory dynamics
over time, this study focuses on two fundamen-
tal and task-agnostic operations—memory addi-
tion and memory deletion—while omitting more
complex mechanisms such as structural transfor-
mation (Zeng et al., 2024), merging (Liu et al.,
2023), summarization (Pan et al., 2025), and reflec-
tion (Shinn et al., 2024). These advanced opera-
tions usually rewrite or restructure memory con-
tents in agent-specific ways, making their effects
harder to separate from the core memory dynam-
ics studied here. Consequently, when extending
our findings to systems that integrate these ad-
vanced updating mechanisms or operate with dif-
ferent agent architectures, additional fine-grained
analyses will be helpful.
Another limitation concerns the lack of theoret-
ical guarantees. Our findings are primarily based
on extensive empirical analyses, which, although
comprehensive, do not provide formal theoretical
proofs. Given the inherent complexity of agentic
systems, deriving such guarantees is often infeasi-
ble. Nonetheless, we believe that the proposed
framework offers a solid foundation for future
theoretical investigation, particularly through con-
trolled experimentation in our synthetic RegAgent
environment.
References
Petr Anokhin, Nikita Semenov, Artyom Sorokin, Dmitry
Evseev, Mikhail Burtsev, and Evgeny Burnaev. 2024.
Arigraph: Learning knowledge graph world models
with episodic memory for llm agents. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2407.04363.
H Beaunieux, V Hubert, T Witkowski, AL Pitel, S Rossi,
JM Danion, B Desgranges, and F Eustache. 2006.
Which processes are involved in cognitive procedu-
ral learning? Memory. 2006 Jul;14(5):521-39. doi:
10.1080/09658210500477766. PMID: 16754239.
Holger Caesar, Varun Bankiti, Alex H Lang, Sourabh
V ora, Venice Erin Liong, Qiang Xu, Anush Krishnan,
Yu Pan, Giancarlo Baldan, and Oscar Beijbom. 2020.
nuscenes: A multimodal dataset for autonomous driv-
ing. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference
on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages
11621–11631.
Yuki Hou, Haruki Tamoto, and Homei Miyashita. 2024.
" my agent understands me better": Integrating dy-
namic human-like memory recall and consolidation
in llm-based agents. In Extended Abstracts of the
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems, pages 1–7.
Mengkang Hu, Tianxing Chen, Qiguang Chen, Yao Mu,
Wenqi Shao, and Ping Luo. 2024. Hiagent: Hier-
archical working memory management for solving
long-horizon agent tasks with large language model.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.09559.
Alistair E. W. Johnson, Tom J. Pollard, Lu Shen, Li-
Wei H. Lehman, Mengling Feng, Mohammad Ghas-
semi, Benjamin Moody, Peter Szolovits, Leo An-
thony Celi, and Roger G. Mark. 2016. MIMIC-III,
a freely accessible critical care database. Scientific
Data, 3:160035.
Abhilasha Ashok Kumar. 2020. Semantic memory: A
review of methods, models, and current challenges.
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 28:40 – 80.
631

--- PAGE 10 ---

Aditya Kusupati, Gantavya Bhatt, Aniket Rege,
Matthew Wallingford, Aditya Sinha, Vivek Ramanu-
jan, William Howard-Snyder, Kaifeng Chen, Sham
Kakade, Prateek Jain, and 1 others. 2022. Ma-
tryoshka representation learning. Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 35:30233–30249.
Andrew Kyle Lampinen, Martin Engelcke, Yuxuan Li,
Arslan Chaudhry, and James L. McClelland. 2025.
Latent learning: episodic memory complements para-
metric learning by enabling flexible reuse of experi-
ences.
Yang Li, Yangyang Yu, Haohang Li, Zhi Chen, and
Khaldoun Khashanah. 2023. Tradinggpt: Multi-
agent system with layered memory and distinct char-
acters for enhanced financial trading performance.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.03736.
Xuechen Liang, Yangfan He, Yinghui Xia, Xinyuan
Song, Jianhui Wang, Meiling Tao, Li Sun, Xin-
hang Yuan, Jiayi Su, Keqin Li, and 1 oth-
ers. 2024. Self-evolving agents with reflective
and memory-augmented abilities. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2409.00872.
Lei Liu, Xiaoyan Yang, Yue Shen, Binbin Hu, Zhiqiang
Zhang, Jinjie Gu, and Guannan Zhang. 2023. Think-
in-memory: Recalling and post-thinking enable
llms with long-term memory. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2311.08719.
Man Luo, Xin Xu, Yue Liu, Panupong Pasupat, and
Mehran Kazemi. 2024. In-context learning with re-
trieved demonstrations for language models: A sur-
vey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.11624.
Jiageng Mao, Junjie Ye, Yuxi Qian, Marco Pavone, and
Yue Wang. 2024. A language agent for autonomous
driving. In First Conference on Language Modeling.
Euclides Carlos Pinto Neto, Sajjad Dadkhah, Raphael
Ferreira, Alireza Zohourian, Rongxing Lu, and Ali A.
Ghorbani. 2023. Ciciot2023: A real-time dataset and
benchmark for large-scale attacks in iot environment.
Sensors, 23(13).
Andrew Nuxoll and John E. Laird. 2007. Extending cog-
nitive architecture with episodic memory. In AAAI
Conference on Artificial Intelligence.
Jiayi Pan, Yichi Zhang, Nicholas Tomlin, Yifei Zhou,
Sergey Levine, and Alane Suhr. 2024. Autonomous
evaluation and refinement of digital agents. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2404.06474.
Zhuoshi Pan, Qianhui Wu, Huiqiang Jiang, Xufang
Luo, Hao Cheng, Dongsheng Li, Yuqing Yang, Chin-
Yew Lin, H Vicky Zhao, Lili Qiu, and 1 others.
2025. On memory construction and retrieval for
personalized conversational agents. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2502.05589.
Joon Sung Park, Joseph O’Brien, Carrie Jun Cai, Mered-
ith Ringel Morris, Percy Liang, and Michael S Bern-
stein. 2023. Generative agents: Interactive simulacra
of human behavior. In Proceedings of the 36th an-
nual acm symposium on user interface software and
technology, pages 1–22.
Wenqi Shi, Ran Xu, Yuchen Zhuang, Yue Yu, Jieyu
Zhang, Hang Wu, Yuanda Zhu, Joyce Ho, Carl Yang,
and May D Wang. 2024. Ehragent: Code empow-
ers large language models for complex tabular rea-
soning on electronic health records. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2401.07128.
Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Ashwin Gopinath,
Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao. 2024. Re-
flexion: Language agents with verbal reinforcement
learning. Advances in Neural Information Process-
ing Systems, 36.
Theodore R Sumers, Shunyu Yao, Karthik Narasimhan,
and Thomas L Griffiths. 2023. Cognitive ar-
chitectures for language agents. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2309.02427.
Guanzhi Wang, Yuqi Xie, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Man-
dlekar, Chaowei Xiao, Yuke Zhu, Linxi Fan, and
Anima Anandkumar. 2023. V oyager: An open-ended
embodied agent with large language models. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2305.16291.
Lei Wang, Chen Ma, Xueyang Feng, Zeyu Zhang, Hao
Yang, Jingsen Zhang, Zhiyuan Chen, Jiakai Tang,
Xu Chen, Yankai Lin, and 1 others. 2024a. A survey
on large language model based autonomous agents.
Frontiers of Computer Science, 18(6):186345.
Zhiruo Wang, Daniel Fried, and Graham Neubig. 2024b.
Trove: Inducing verifiable and efficient toolboxes
for solving programmatic tasks. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2401.12869.
Zora Zhiruo Wang, Jiayuan Mao, Daniel Fried, and
Graham Neubig. 2025. Agent workflow memory. In
Forty-second International Conference on Machine
Learning.
Zhen Xiang, Linzhi Zheng, Yanjie Li, Junyuan Hong,
Qinbin Li, Han Xie, Jiawei Zhang, Zidi Xiong,
Chulin Xie, Carl Yang, and 1 others. 2024. Guarda-
gent: Safeguard llm agents by a guard agent
via knowledge-enabled reasoning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2406.09187.
Wujiang Xu, Kai Mei, Hang Gao, Juntao Tan, Zu-
jie Liang, and Yongfeng Zhang. 2025. A-mem:
Agentic memory for llm agents. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2502.12110.
Zhangyue Yin, Qiushi Sun, Qipeng Guo, Zhiyuan Zeng,
Qinyuan Cheng, Xipeng Qiu, and Xuan-Jing Huang.
2024. Explicit memory learning with expectation
maximization. In Proceedings of the 2024 Confer-
ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, pages 16618–16635.
Ruihong Zeng, Jinyuan Fang, Siwei Liu, and Zaiqiao
Meng. 2024. On the structural memory of llm agents.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.15266.
632

--- PAGE 11 ---

Zeyu Zhang, Xiaohe Bo, Chen Ma, Rui Li, Xu Chen,
Quanyu Dai, Jieming Zhu, Zhenhua Dong, and Ji-
Rong Wen. 2024. A survey on the memory mecha-
nism of large language model based agents. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2404.13501.
Andrew Zhao, Daniel Huang, Quentin Xu, Matthieu
Lin, Yong-Jin Liu, and Gao Huang. 2024. Expel:
Llm agents are experiential learners. In Proceedings
of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence ,
volume 38, pages 19632–19642.
Longtao Zheng, Rundong Wang, Xinrun Wang, and
Bo An. 2024. Synapse: Trajectory-as-exemplar
prompting with memory for computer control. In
The Twelfth International Conference on Learning
Representations.
Wanjun Zhong, Lianghong Guo, Qiqi Gao, He Ye, and
Yanlin Wang. 2024. Memorybank: Enhancing large
language models with long-term memory. In Pro-
ceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelli-
gence, volume 38, pages 19724–19731.
Huichi Zhou, Yihang Chen, Siyuan Guo, Xue Yan,
Kin Hei Lee, Zihan Wang, Ka Yiu Lee, Guchun
Zhang, Kun Shao, Linyi Yang, and 1 others. 2025.
Agentfly: Fine-tuning llm agents without fine-tuning
llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.16153.
633

--- PAGE 12 ---

A Detailed experimental setups.
A.1 Agent details and functionality
RegAgents RegAgent serves as a synthetic and
controlled environment to study the effects of
memory management on long-term agent perfor-
mance. We first generate an implicit weight vector
w ∈R6, and the task is to predict the correct out-
put y = w⊤xby retrieving the six most relevant
demonstrations from memory. Specifically, we gen-
erate 100 input vectors xsampled from three Gaus-
sian distributions N(µ,1) with µ ∈−0.5,0,0.5,
each of six dimensions, and compute y= w⊤x+ϵ,
where ϵ is bounded noise within [−1,1]. These
pairs form the initial memory bank. During actual
execution, we collect 4000 input–output pairs from
the same three distributions. A prediction ˆyis con-
sidered successful if |ˆy−y|≤ 1, and we use the
success rate as the primary performance metric.
For retrieval, input similarity is measured by co-
sine similarity between input vectors, while out-
put similarity is defined as output_similarity =
exp(−γ|x1 −x2|2),where γ = 1.0.
This task is highly controllable and well-suited
for our study, as it (1) relies solely on the retrieved
demonstrations, (2) allows the agent to either rea-
son or directly mimic the demonstrations to pro-
duce outputs, and (3) enables clear definitions of
error and addition criteria.
For evaluation, the strict evaluator applies a
threshold of 1.0 on the absolute error between pre-
diction and ground truth. Coarse evaluators use
thresholds of 1.6 (C1), 1.4 (C2), and 1.2 (C3), re-
spectively. Periodic deletion is performed with
500 steps with α= 0. History-based deletion is ap-
plied with a minimum deletion frequency of 5 and a
threshold β = 0.5 across all setups. The combined
deletion strategy reuses all hyperparameters above.
We also list the task prompt in Appendix A.2
EHRAgents Following EHRAgent (Shi et al.,
2024), our agent is a code-generation system that
enables clinicians to interact with electronic health
records (EHRs) through natural language queries.
We adopt the MIMIC-III dataset (Johnson et al.,
2016) for evaluation. After filtering out duplicated
and unanswerable entries, we obtain 2,392 tasks in
total. During each test query, the agent retrieves
four past experiences from an initial memory bank
containing 100 records, based on maximum cosine
similarity computed using a general text embed-
ding model. We report task performance in terms
of accuracy (ACC).
For our implementation, we use OpenAI text-
embedding-3-large as the text encoder. For
the coarse evaluator, we use the built-in LLM-
generated termination signal, which reflects if LLM
considers the task to be completed. For the strict
evaluator, we use exact match to determine whether
the generated answer is correct. For input similar-
ity, we take the highest cosine similarity between
the text embedding of all retrieved experiences
and the task. For output similarity, we use the
pycode_similar package3 to detect the code plagia-
rism score between the execution from the retrieved
memory with the highest input similarity and the
current model execution. For periodic deletion, we
use a period of 200 and α= 0. For history-based
deletion, we set the minimal deleting frequency to
5 and the threshold βto 0.3 for the coarse evaluator
using GPT-4o-mini and GPT-4.1-mini, and 0.7 for
the strict and GPT-4.1-mini fine-tuned evaluator.
The combined deletion reuses all hyperparameters
above.
AgentDriver Following AgentDriver (Mao et al.,
2024), we adopt an LLM-based autonomous driv-
ing agent that integrates common sense and expe-
riential knowledge into memory records. We use
the nuScenes dataset (Caesar et al., 2020) and ran-
domly sample 2,000 test cases from its test split.
The initial memory contains 180 experiences ran-
domly drawn from the nuScenes training set.
For the retrieval strategy, the original retrieval
pipeline proposed by (Mao et al., 2024) consists of
a two-step process: first, selecting the top-3 experi-
ences based on vector similarity, and then prompt-
ing an LLM to choose the most relevant one. To
improve reproducibility, we simplify this process to
a single-step retrieval, selecting only the top-1 ex-
perience based on vector similarity. For the coarse
evaluator, we employ an LLM to assess the quality
of retrieved experiences. The LLM outputs either
“yes” or “no” to indicate whether a given experience
is a “good” experience or a “bad” one. The prompt
used for this LLM-based evaluation is provided in
Appendix A.4. For the strict evaluator, we measure
the UniAD 3-second average L2 distance between
the predicted trajectory and the ground truth. Expe-
riences with an L2 error lower than 2.5 are added to
the memory bank. For input similarity, we adhere
to the computation method from the original paper.
3https://github.com/fyrestone/pycode_similar.
git
634

--- PAGE 13 ---

Table 3: Details of Agents and Their Functionality
Agent Name Task Input Output Retrieve #ExperiencesFeature
RegAgent Regression prediction Input vector Output number Input vector 6
EHRAgents EHR tasks Task Code Text 4text query embedding
AgentDriver Autonomous Vehicle Predicted trajectory Ego state, goal, 1Driving state data history trajectory
CIC-IoT Agent IoT Traffic Detection IoT packet Reasoning and prediction IoT features 3(8 categories) data attack type
Specifically, we compute the exponential negative
L2 distance between the query vector and stored
experiences, using the same coefficients as in (Mao
et al., 2024). For output similarity, we compute
the radial basis function (RBF) kernel between the
predicted trajectory and the ground-truth trajectory.
The similarity score is calculated with the same
formula in RegAgent:
output_similarity = exp
(
−γ∥v1 −v2∥2)
.
In our experiments, we set γ = 1.0. For peri-
odic deletion, we apply a deletion period of 500
steps with a threshold of α= 0. For history-based
deletion, we set a threshold of 5.0 for the UniAD
3-second average L2 distance. An experience is
deleted if it has been retrieved at least 3 times and
the mean UniAD 3-second average L2 distance
across all retrievals exceeds this threshold. Coarse
deletion leverages the predicted success rate from
the coarse evaluator and deletes a record if the accu-
mulated success rate is less than 0.5. The combined
deletion mechanism incorporates all the aforemen-
tioned hyperparameters.
CIC-IoT Following the setup in the CIC-IoT
benchmark (Neto et al., 2023), we implement a
network traffic detection agent designed to predict
traffic types from IoT packet features. The orig-
inal CIC-IoT dataset contains 34 attack classes.
Since our implementation relies solely on single-
flow features, we exclude categories that cannot be
distinguished based on such features. For exam-
ple, we retain DDoS- HTTP_Flood while removing
DoS- HTTP_Flood due to their high similarity un-
der single-flow representations. After filtering, we
retain 8 representative classes that remain distin-
guishable using single-flow features, and construct
each test query by formatting these features into a
predefined prompt template. We evaluate CIC-IoT
Agent on the CIC-IoT dataset, randomly sampling
1,000 test cases from its training split. During each
execution, the agent retrieves three past experiences
using a feature-based similarity approach. The ini-
tial memory bank is initialized with 100 synthetic
records generated by GPT-4o-mini from a disjoint
training subset. We report task performance in
terms of accuracy (ACC).
For the text encoder, we use OpenAI text-
embedding-3-large. For the coarse evaluator, simi-
lar to AgentDriver, we employ an LLM to assess
the quality of the experiences. The prompt for the
CIC-IoT Agent’s LLM evaluator is provided in Ap-
pendix A.4. For the strict evaluator, we use string
matching to check if the ground-truth is contained
in the generated answer. For input similarity, we
use a feature-based approach. Specifically, we com-
pute the relative change across all features and take
the average. For continuous features, the relative
change between two inputs, input1 and input2,
for feature fi is computed as:
Scont(fi) = |input1(fi) −input2(fi)|
max(|input1(fi)|,|input2(fi)|)
For discrete features, we define the relative change
as follows:
Sdisc(fi) =
{
0, if input1(fi) = input2(fi)
1, otherwise
For output similarity, we calculate the embedding
similarity. For periodic deletion, we set a cycle of
500 steps, and α= 1. For history-based deletion,
we set the experience quality threshold β = 0.7.
If an experience is retrieved 3 or more times and
the average score of all test samples when using
this experience falls below 0.7, the experience is
removed. The combined deletion strategy reuses
all the hyperparameters mentioned above.
635

--- PAGE 14 ---

A.2 RegAgent design
Below is the user prompt used for the RegAgent
task.
User Prompt
You are given a 6-dimensional input vector
x. Predict y = wT xwith an unknown w.
You will see K demonstrations of (input,
guess) pairs that use the same w but may
contain noise in all demonstrations.
You need to strictly follow the output
content and format of the demonstrations,
which is Guess:
boxed{{<number>}} without any other
text.
Demonstrations (K=k): {demonstrations}
Now solve for the new input.
Input: {x} Guess:
A.3 CIC-IoT Agent design
Below is the user prompt used in CIC-IoT Agent to
incorporate IoT packet data and all possible traffic
types.
User Prompt
Based on the following features, determine
the most likely traffic type from the list be-
low:
* Pay special attention to cross-field consis-
tency checks.
* Do not be misled by a single feature if it
conflicts with others.
* Note: Your reasoning should be based on
all features, not on any single field. You
are allowed to select only one traffic type as
your answer. If you choose more than one,
your answer will be marked as incorrect.
Required output format:
ANALYSIS: {your reasoning here, includ-
ing key features and justification}
ANSWER: {traffic_type}
(Continued on next page...)
User Prompt
Flow duration [description: Duration of the
packet’s flow]: {flow_duration}
Header Length [description: Header
Length]: {Header_Length} bytes
Protocol Type [description: IP, UDP,
TCP, IGMP, ICMP, Unknown (Integers)]:
{Protocol_Type}
Duration [description: Time-to-Live (ttl)]:
{Duration}
Rate [description: Rate of packet transmis-
sion in a flow]: {Rate}
Srate [description: Rate of outbound
packets transmission in a flow]: {Srate}
Drate [description: Rate of inbound packets
transmission in a flow]: {Drate}
Number of FIN flags [description: FIN flag
value]: {fin_flag_number}
Number of SYN flags [description: SYN
flag value]: {syn_flag_number}
Number of RST flags [description: RST
flag value]: {rst_flag_number}
Number of PSH flags [description: PSH
flag value]: {psh_flag_number}
Number of ACK flags [description: ACK
flag value]: {ack_flag_number}
Number of ECE flags [description: ECE
flag value]: {ece_flag_number}
Number of CWR flags [description: CWR
flag value]: {cwr_flag_number}
Number of ACK packets [description:
Number of packets with ACK flag set in the
same flow]: {ack_count}
Number of SYN packets [description:
Number of packets with SYN flag set in the
same flow]: {syn_count}
Number of FIN packets [description:
Number of packets with FIN flag set in the
same flow]: {fin_count}
Number of URG packets [description:
Number of packets with URG flag set in
the same flow]: {urg_count}
Number of RST packets [description:
Number of packets with RST flag set in the
same flow]: {rst_count}
HTTP traffic flag [description: Indicates
if the application layer protocol is HTTP]:
{HTTP}
(Continued on next page...)
636

--- PAGE 15 ---

User Prompt
(Continuation from previous page...)
HTTPS traffic flag [description: Indicates
if the application layer protocol is HTTPS]:
{HTTPS}
DNS traffic flag [description: Indicates
if the application layer protocol is DNS]:
{DNS}
Telnet traffic flag [description: Indicates
if the application layer protocol is Telnet]:
{Telnet}
SMTP traffic flag [description: Indicates
if the application layer protocol is SMTP]:
{SMTP}
SSH traffic flag [description: Indicates if the
application layer protocol is SSH]: {SSH}
IRC traffic flag [description: Indicates if the
application layer protocol is IRC]: {IRC}
TCP traffic flag [description: Indicates if
the transport layer protocol is TCP]: {TCP}
UDP traffic flag [description: Indicates
if the transport layer protocol is UDP]:
{UDP}
DHCP traffic flag [description: Indicates
if the application layer protocol is DHCP]:
{DHCP}
ARP traffic flag [description: Indicates if
the link layer protocol is ARP]: {ARP}
ICMP traffic flag [description: Indicates
if the network layer protocol is ICMP]:
{ICMP}
IPv4 traffic flag [description: Indicates if
the network layer protocol is IP]: {IPv}
LLC traffic flag [description: Indicates if
the link layer protocol is LLC]: {LLC}
Total sum of feature values [description:
Summation of packets’ lengths in the flow]:
{Tot_sum}
Minimum value [description: Minimum
packet length in the flow]: {Min}
(Continued on next page...)
User Prompt
(Continuation from previous page...)
Maximum value [description: Maximum
packet length in the flow]: {Max}
Average value [description: Average packet
length in the flow]: {A VG}
Standard deviation [description: Standard
deviation of packet length in the flow]:
{Std}
Total size of the flow [description: Packet’s
length]: {Tot_size} bytes
Inter-arrival time (milliseconds) [descrip-
tion: The time difference with the previous
packet]: {IAT}
Number of packets or flows [description:
The number of packets in the flow]:
{Number}
Magnitude of the flow [description: Av-
erage of the lengths of incoming packets
in the flow + average of the lengths of
outgoing packets in the flow]: {Magnitude}
Radius of the flow [description: Variance
of the lengths of incoming packets in the
flow + variance of the lengths of outgoing
packets in the flow]: {Radius}
Covariance of the flow [description:
Covariance of the lengths of incoming and
outgoing packets]: {Covariance}
Variance of the flow [description: Variance
of the lengths of incoming packets in the
flow / variance of the lengths of outgoing
packets in the flow]: {Variance}
Weight of the flow [description: Number
of incoming packets / number of outgoing
packets]: {Weight}
### Traffic Types:
[’DDoS-ICMP_Flood’, ’DDoS-
UDP_Flood’, ’DDoS-TCP_Flood’, ’DDoS-
SYN_Flood’, ’DDoS-PSHACK_Flood’,
’DDoS-RSTFINFlood’, ’DDoS-
HTTP_Flood’, ’BenignTraffic’]
637

--- PAGE 16 ---

A.4 Coarse evaluator prompts
Below is the system prompt used for our coarse
evaluator (LLM judge) in EHRAgent:
System Prompt
You are an expert judge for Electronic
Health Records (EHR) database queries and
analysis. Your task is to evaluate whether
the provided code solution and execution re-
sult are reasonable and correct for the given
medical database question.
You should assess the solution based on: 1)
**Code Quality**: Does the code use appro-
priate database functions and follow logical
steps? Be lenient about minor inefficiencies
or alternative valid approaches. 2) **Re-
sult Reasonableness**: Does the execution
result appear plausible and well-formatted
for the medical context? 3) **Complete-
ness**: Does the solution address the core
question asked? Accept solutions that may
miss minor constraints but solve the main
problem.
**Evaluation Guidelines:** - Focus on
whether the solution would produce a rea-
sonable answer in practice - Accept alter-
native valid approaches even if not optimal
- Be lenient about missing minor date fil-
ters if the core logic is sound - Consider the
medical context - some variation in results
is normal - Only reject solutions that are
fundamentally flawed or completely irrele-
vant
**Available Tool Functions:** (1) Cal-
culate(FORMULA), which calculates
the FORMULA and returns the result.
(2) LoadDB(DBNAME) which loads
the database DBNAME and returns the
database. The DBNAME can be one of
the following: admissions, chartevents,
cost, d_icd_diagnoses, d_icd_procedures,
d_items, d_labitems, diagnoses_icd,
icustays, inputevents_cv, labevents, mi-
crobiologyevents, outputevents,patients,
prescriptions, procedures_icd, transfers.
(Continued on next page...)
System Prompt
(Continuation from previous page...)
(3) FilterDB(DATABASE, CONDITIONS),
which filters the DATABASE according to
the CONDITIONS. The CONDITIONS is
a string composed of multiple conditions,
each of which consists of the column_name,
the relation and the value (e.g., COST<10).
The CONDITIONS is one single string
(e.g., "admissions, SUBJECT_ID=24971").
(4) GetValue(DATABASE, ARGUMENT),
which returns the values of the column in
the DATABASE. When there is no addi-
tional operations on the values, the ARGU-
MENT is the column_name in demand. If
the values need to be returned with certain
operations, the ARGUMENT is composed
of the column_name and the operation (like
COST, sum). Please do not contain " or ’
in the argument. (5) SQLInterpreter(SQL),
which interprets the query SQL and re-
turns the result. (6) Calendar(DURATION),
which returns the date after the duration of
time.
**Available Tables:** admissions,
chartevents, cost, d_icd_diagnoses,
d_icd_procedures, d_items, d_labitems,
diagnoses_icd, icustays, inputevents_cv,
labevents, microbiologyevents, out-
putevents, patients, prescriptions, proce-
dures_icd, transfers
**Knowledge of the Tables:** (1) Tables
are linked by identifiers which usually have
the suffix ’ID’. For example, SUBJECT_ID
refers to a unique patient, HADM_ID refers
to a unique admission to the hospital, and
ICUSTAY_ID refers to a unique admission
to an intensive care unit. (2) Charted events
such as notes, laboratory tests, and fluid
balance are stored in a series of ’events’
tables. For example the outputevents table
contains all measurements related to output
for a given patient, while the labevents table
contains laboratory test results for a patient.
(Continued on next page...)
638

--- PAGE 17 ---

System Prompt
(Continuation from previous page...)
(3) Tables prefixed with ’d_’ are dictionary
tables and provide definitions for identifiers.
For example, every row of chartevents is
associated with a single ITEMID which
represents the concept measured, but it
does not contain the actual name of the
measurement. By joining chartevents
and d_items on ITEMID, it is possible to
identify the concept represented by a given
ITEMID.
(4) For the databases, four of them are
used to define and track patient stays:
admissions, patients, icustays, and transfers.
Another four tables are dictionaries for
cross-referencing codes against their
respective definitions: d_icd_diagnoses,
d_icd_procedures, d_items, and d_labitems.
The remaining tables, including chartevents,
cost, inputevents_cv, labevents, microbi-
ologyevents, outputevents, prescriptions,
procedures_icd, contain data associated
with patient care, such as physiological
measurements, caregiver observations,
and billing information. For different
tables, they contain the following in-
formation: (1) admissions: ROW_ID,
SUBJECT_ID, HADM_ID, ADMITTIME,
DISCHTIME, ADMISSION_TYPE,
ADMISSION_LOCATION, DIS-
CHARGE_LOCATION, INSURANCE,
LANGUAGE, MARITAL_STATUS, ETH-
NICITY , AGE (2) chartevents: ROW_ID,
SUBJECT_ID, HADM_ID, ICUSTAY_ID,
ITEMID, CHARTTIME, V ALUENUM,
V ALUEUOM (3) cost: ROW_ID, SUB-
JECT_ID, HADM_ID, EVENT_TYPE,
EVENT_ID, CHARGETIME, COST (4)
d_icd_diagnoses: ROW_ID, ICD9_CODE,
SHORT_TITLE, LONG_TITLE (5)
d_icd_procedures: ROW_ID, ICD9_CODE,
SHORT_TITLE, LONG_TITLE (6)
d_items: ROW_ID, ITEMID, LABEL,
LINKSTO (7) d_labitems: ROW_ID,
ITEMID, LABEL (8) dianoses_icd:
ROW_ID, SUBJECT_ID, HADM_ID,
ICD9_CODE, CHARTTIME (Continued
on next page...)
System Prompt
(Continuation from previous page...)
(9) icustays: ROW_ID, SUB-
JECT_ID, HADM_ID, ICUSTAY_ID,
FIRST_CAREUNIT, LAST_CAREUNIT,
FIRST_WARDID, LAST_WARDID,
INTIME, OUTTIME (10) inputevents_cv:
ROW_ID, SUBJECT_ID, HADM_ID,
ICUSTAY_ID, CHARTTIME, ITEMID,
AMOUNT (11) labevents: ROW_ID,
SUBJECT_ID, HADM_ID, ITEMID,
CHARTTIME, V ALUENUM, V AL-
UEUOM
(12) microbiologyevents: RROW_ID,
SUBJECT_ID, HADM_ID, CHARTTIME,
SPEC_TYPE_DESC, ORG_NAME (13)
outputevents: ROW_ID, SUBJECT_ID,
HADM_ID, ICUSTAY_ID, CHART-
TIME, ITEMID, V ALUE (14) patients:
ROW_ID, SUBJECT_ID, GENDER,
DOB, DOD (15) prescriptions: ROW_ID,
SUBJECT_ID, HADM_ID, STARTDATE,
ENDDATE, DRUG, DOSE_V AL_RX,
DOSE_UNIT_RX, ROUTE (16) pro-
cedures_icd: ROW_ID, SUBJECT_ID,
HADM_ID, ICD9_CODE, CHARTTIME
(17) transfers: ROW_ID, SUBJECT_ID,
HADM_ID, ICUSTAY_ID, EVENT-
TYPE, CAREUNIT, WARDID, INTIME,
OUTTIME
**Correct Examples:** {EHRA-
gent_4Shots_Knowledge}
Now, please judge whether the provided so-
lution is reasonable and correct. Please as-
sume that the solution is bug-free and does
not contain any syntax errors.
### Execution to be judged: Ques-
tion:{question} Knowledge:{knowledge}
Solution:{code}
### Execution Result: {execution_result}
### Your Task: Evaluate whether this solu-
tion is reasonable and correct. Consider the
medical context, database logic, and result
plausibility.
**Output Format:** - First line of your an-
swer: ’yes’ or ’no’ ONLY . - Following lines:
briefly provide your reasoning and analysis.
Your evaluation:
Below is the system and user prompt used for
our coarse evaluator (LLM judge) in AgentDriver:
639

--- PAGE 18 ---

System Prompt
You are a highly knowledgeable and rigor-
ous judge for autonomous driving. You are
judging a *short-horizon* trajectory (e.g., 6
steps). We only require the following:
1) The predicted trajectory should *gener-
ally* move towards or align with the goal.
2) It should stay within a drivable area (i.e.,
allowed region).
3) It should avoid collisions with other
objects.
Your output format:
- First line: strictly output ’yes’ or ’no’.
- Following lines: provide your reasoning
(Chain-of-Thought is allowed).
Be mindful that small lateral or partial for-
ward movements can be acceptable as long
as the overall direction is consistent with
the planning target and safety requirements.
Our coordinate system is such that the x-
axis is lateral, and the y-axis is forward.
Therefore, moving forward means an in-
crease in y values.
Be mindful that minor lateral adjustments
or minimal forward movements are accept-
able.
If the y coordinate is increasing from
step to step (and there’s no collision or
out-of-lane), that may be considered a
success. Below are the relevant information
for this autonomous driving task:
1) Current state of the ego vehicle:
{ego_prompts}
2) Perception of the environment:
{perception_prompts}
3) Commonsense: {commonsense_mem}
4) Planning target:
{planning_target}
5) Predicted trajectory:
User Prompt
{pred_traj}
Please decide if the predicted trajec-
tory is successful under the above criteria,
then provide your reasoning (you may use
chain-of-thought).
Remember:
- First line of your answer: ’yes’ or ’no’
ONLY .
- Following lines: your reasons or chain-of-
thought.
Below is the user prompt used for our coarse
evaluator (LLM judge) in CIC-IoT Agent:
User Prompt
You are a strict evaluator for IoT traffic
classification answers. You should infer
the most likely label from the provided
flow-level features, then judge whether the
model’s answer is CORRECT or INCOR-
RECT.
### Judging Criteria The Model Answer
is CORRECT if its predicted label exactly
matches your inferred gold label, else IN-
CORRECT.
### Judging Steps 1) Carefully analyze key
fields and reason your inferred gold label.
2) Compare the Model Answer’s label to
your gold label.
### Problem: Based on the following fea-
tures, determine the most likely traffic type
from the list below:
### Features: problem
### Model Answer: {generated_answer}
- Respond with your judgement and ex-
plaination as following format.
- First line: Respond with ’CORRECT’ or
’INCORRECT’ only.
- Following lines: Provide your reasoning
or chain-of-thought.
Your judgement:
A.5 Additional setup for task distribution
shift
For task distribution shift, we obtain the embed-
ding vectors for all test queries using OpenAI
text-embedding-3-large encoder for EHRAgent,
and the original input vector computation method
640

--- PAGE 19 ---

from AgentDriver. We then apply a Gaussian Mix-
ture Model (GMM) to cluster the embeddings into
three groups – each group will likely have a dis-
tinguished task distribution. Finally, we reorder
the test queries based on their assigned cluster la-
bels to process the three task groups sequentially.
This procedure forces a pronounced shift in the task
distribution.
B Additional results
B.1 Additional results on addition
experiments
We present additional results for the memory addi-
tion experiments in this section.
Figure 8: Accuracy trends of different addition strate-
gies over long-term running on EhrAgent and CIC-IoT.
B.2 Experiments on different LLM backbones
In this experiment, we conduct experiments with
different LLM Agent backbones. Specifically, we
conduct evaluation on GPT-4o and Deepseek-V3
with fixed-memory baseline, strict addition, strict
addition with history-based deletion, and strict ad-
dition with combined deletion in Figure 11 and
Figure 10, respectively. Across these two mod-
els, we observed consistent trend within the main
Figure 9: Cumulative average output similarity vs. in-
put similarity of different addition strategies over the
execution on AgentDriver and CIC-IoT.
experiments. In addition, their input similarity ver-
sus output similarity using add strict strategies and
show in Figure 12.
Figure 10: Accuracy trends of GPT-4o over long-term
running on AgentDriver
To further strengthen reproducibility, we addi-
tionally evaluate RegAgent with two open-source
Qwen backbones. Table 4 shows that the same qual-
itative trends persist: strict addition outperforms
add-all, experience-following remains strong, and
history-based deletion separates higher-quality re-
641

--- PAGE 20 ---

Figure 11: Accuracy trends of Deepseek-V3 over long-
term running on AgentDriver
Figure 12: Cumulative average output similarity
vs. input similarity over GPT-4o-mini, GPT-4o, and
Deepseek-V3 using add strict in AgentDriver
tained memories from deleted ones.
Table 4: Results on open-source Qwen backbones for
RegAgent. For addition strategies, we report SR with
Pearson correlation rin parentheses. For history-based
deletion, we report SR with retained/deleted mean qual-
ity in parentheses.
Qwen3-32B Qwen3-14B
Add All 56.9 (0.74) 55.4 (0.82)
Coarse 67.9 (0.69) 65.7 (0.76)
Strict 72.9 (0.72) 72.9 (0.89)
Coarse + Hist66.5 (0.61/1.01) 64.4 (0.63/0.97)
Strict + Hist 68.4 (0.40/0.54) 73.6 (0.41/0.51)
B.3 Robustness to key hyperparameters
We additionally evaluate whether the main findings
remain stable under different retrieval counts and
deletion hyperparameters. The full agent-specific
defaults used in the paper are listed in Appendix A;
here we vary only the key memory-related hyper-
parameters highlighted in the rebuttal.
Table 5: Robustness of memory addition under different
retrieval counts. For RegAgent, we report success rate
(SR) with Pearson correlation rin parentheses; for CIC-
IoT Agent, we report accuracy (ACC) with Pearson r
in parentheses. The experience-following correlation
remains high across retrieval-count choices.
Setting 1 Setting 2 Setting 3
RegAgent 6 demos 3 demos 12 demos
Add All 55.5 (0.95) 57.2 (0.92) 49.6 (0.90)
Strict 71.0 (0.92) 75.0 (0.90) 64.1 (0.95)
CIC-IoT Agent3 demos 1 demo 5 demos
Add All 71.5 (0.87) 73.2 (0.91) 78.2 (0.93)
Strict 85.4 (0.82) 80.4 (0.84) 84.1 (0.85)
Table 6: Robustness of deletion under different hyper-
parameters. For RegAgent history-based deletion, we
report SR with retained/deleted mean quality in paren-
theses; all other entries report task performance only.
The qualitative behavior of history-based and periodic
deletion remains consistent across reasonable settings.
Setting 1 Setting 2 Setting 3
RegAgent 5 retrievals 10 retrievals 15 retrievals
History 69.8 (0.44/0.53) 67.4 (0.45/0.57) 70.1 (0.44/0.56)
β= 0.5 β= 0.4 β= 0.6
History 69.8 (0.44/0.53) 67.3 (0.43/0.55) 62.0 (0.41/0.48)
period= 500 period= 100 period= 300
Periodic 67.7 53.2 64.0
CIC-IoT Agent3 retrievals 5 retrievals 7 retrievals
History 89.6 87.6 88.7
β= 0.7 β= 0.6 β= 0.8
History 89.6 90.2 89.6
period= 500 period= 100 period= 300
Periodic 80.8 79.8 79.1
B.4 Error-free variant of history-based
deletion
In Figure 13, we follow the procedure in Sec-
tion 3.4 to plot the history-based deletion and its
error-free variant. Surprisingly, for AgentDriver,
we observe that around task index 1000, the com-
bined deletion with strict addition surpasses the
performance of its error-free variant. This sug-
gests that history-based deletion can retain mem-
ory entries with outputs suitable for later reuse,
corroborating the necessity of adopting this type of
deletion.
B.5 History-based deletion on different
evaluators
In Figure 14, we present performance changes after
history-based deletion on RegAgent and CIC-IoT
Agent with different evaluators.
642

--- PAGE 21 ---

Figure 13: Comparison between history-based deletion
and its error-free variants. Coarse here represents C1
evaluator.
B.6 Size-matched comparison for RegAgent
deletion
To isolate the effect of memory quality from mem-
ory size in RegAgent, we subsample 1000 fre-
quently retrieved memories from the final memory
bank of strict addition with and without history-
based deletion, fix the memory bank, and evaluate
on 1000 fresh test cases. The history-based vari-
ant performs better once memory size is matched,
supporting the interpretation in Section 4.2 that
deletion improves average memory quality even
though the no-deletion variant benefits from retain-
ing more records overall.
Table 7: Size-matched evaluation for RegAgent using
1000 retained memories.
Strategy SR. ↑
Strict + history-based deletion 74.4
Strict only 72.8
Figure 14: Performance comparison after applying
history-based deletion with different evaluators.
Figure 15: Comparison between deleted and retained
records for RegAgent under history-based deletion. The
top figure shows results with Coarse 1.2, and the bottom
figure shows results with Coarse 1.4. Lower absolute
error represents better execution quality.
643

--- PAGE 22 ---

Figure 16: Comparison between deleted records and re-
tained records for AgentDriver. Lower error represents
better execution quality.
Table 8: Correctness rate (%) of deleted records and
retained records for EhrAgent and CIC-IoT Agent with
coarse evaluation.
Agent Category4o-mini 4.1-mini4.1-mini-FT
EhrAgentRetained 44.1 49.1 54.8
Deleted 36.3 32.1 48.2
CIC-IoT Retained 78.9 72.2 86.6
Deleted 56.7 55.1 61.0
B.7 Comparison between deleted records and
retained records
In this section, we analyze the intrinsic quality
differences between retained and deleted memory
records. Figure 15 presents results for the Coarse 1
and Coarse 2 evaluators under history-based dele-
tion, while Figure 16 shows results across all eval-
uators for AgentDriver. Interestingly, when using
GPT-4o-mini as the evaluator, the retained memory
in AgentDriver exhibits lower average quality than
the deleted records. We further report the correct-
ness rates with respect to ground truth for EhrAgent
and CIC-IoT Agent, as shown in Table 8.
B.8 Results under memory resource
constraints.
We provide the results of the agent running under
memory resource constraints in Figure 17. We
also provide additional results on memory resource
constraints with different memory limitation sizes
in Figure 18.
644

--- PAGE 23 ---

Figure 17: Comparison of unlimited memory size versus
a limited memory size for strict and coarse selective
addition with combined deletion. Coarse here denotes
the C1 evaluator.
Figure 18: Different limited sizes versus the perfor-
mance of AgentDriver. The horizontal dashed lines
are their corresponding unlimited variant performance.
Coarse here denotes the C1 evaluator.
645